U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
State of Minnesota
Washington, DC
December 2010

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
State of Minnesota
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program
Washington, DC
December 2010

Authority
The American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996, as amended by the Civil War
Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December
2002), directs the Secretary of the Interior to update the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields.

Acknowledgments
NPS Project Team Paul Hawke, Project Leader; Kathleen Madigan, Survey Coordinator;
Tanya Gossett, Paul Hawke, and January Ruck, Reporting; Matthew Borders, Historian;
Kristie Kendall, Program Assistant
Battlefield Surveyor(s) Paul Hawke, American Battlefield Protection Program
Respondents Tom Ellig, Minnesota Historical Society; Larry Whitaker, Wood Lake
Battlefield Preservation Association

Cover: View of the seasonal (dry) lake bed at Wood Lake battlefield. The lake bed is a defining
feature on the landscape and was the location of the Federal encampment.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 3
SYNOPSIS........................................................................................................................ 5
METHOD STATEMENT ..................................................................................................... 6
RESEARCH AND FIELD SURVEYS ...................................................................................................... 6
QUESTIONNAIRES ....................................................................................................................... 10
SUMMARY OF CONDITIONS OF CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELDS IN MINNESOTA .............. 11
QUANTIFIED LAND AREAS ........................................................................................................... 11
CONDITION ASSESSMENTS ........................................................................................................... 11
REGISTRATION ........................................................................................................................... 12
STEWARDSHIP ............................................................................................................................ 13
PUBLIC ACCESS AND INTERPRETATION........................................................................................... 15
ADVOCACY ............................................................................................................................... 16
INDIVIDUAL BATTLEFIELD PROFILES ........................................................................... 17
APPENDICES ................................................................................................................. 24
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B.
APPENDIX C.
APPENDIX D.

CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD LAND ACQUISITION GRANTS ................................................ 24
AMERICAN BATTLEFIELD PROTECTION PROGRAM PLANNING GRANTS .......................... 25
CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD PRESERVATION ACT OF 2002 ............................................... 26
BATTLEFIELD QUESTIONNAIRE ................................................................................. 29

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

Introduction
The information in this report fulfills, in part, the purposes of the Civil War Battlefield
Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016). Those purposes are:
1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect nationally significant Civil
War battlefields through conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
2)

to create partnerships among state and local governments, regional entities, and
the private sector to preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil
War battlefields.

The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 directs the Secretary of the Interior,
acting through the American Battlefield Protection Program (ABPP) of the National Park
Service, to update the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s
Civil War Battlefields. The CWSAC was established by Congress in 1991 and published its
report in 1993. Congress provided funding for this update in FY2005 and FY2007.
Congress asked that the updated report reflect the following:
•
•
•

Preservation activities carried out at the 384 battlefields identified by the CWSAC
during the period between 1993 and the update;
Changes in the condition of the battlefields during that period; and
Any other relevant developments relating to the battlefields during that period.

In accordance with the legislation, this report presents information about Civil War
battlefields in Minnesota for use by Congress, federal, state, and local government
agencies, landowners, and other interest groups. Other state reports will be issued as
surveys and analyses are completed.
.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

3

Figure 1. Fort Ridgley and Wood Lake are the two CWSAC battlefields in Minnesota.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

4

Synopsis
There are two CWSAC battlefields in Minnesota: Fort Ridgley and Wood Lake.
Historically, these battlefields encompassed more than 2,500 acres.1 Today, one hundred
percent (100%) of the historic landscapes associated with these battles retain their historic
character.2
In 1993, the CWSAC used a four-tiered system that combined historic significance, current
condition, and level of threat to determine priorities for preservation among the
battlefields. While the CWSAC did not physically survey the two Minnesota battlefields in
1993, they did rank them within their four-tier system. The CWSAC ranked both
battlefields as needing additional protection, placing them in the third tier of preservation
priorities. Today, the landscape and setting of Wood Lake have changed little from the
time of the battle. While portions of Fort Ridgely’s landscape have been altered, most
essential features remain.
After surveying the battlefields for this updated report, the American Battlefield
Protection Program (ABPP) has found that the entire Study Areas of both Fort Ridgely
and Wood Lake maintain integrity. Wood Lake’s landscape is nearly pristine, marred
only by a few residential buildings and farm structures. At Fort Ridgely modern
residential buildings and farm structures intrude on the landscape and kaolin and gravel
mining in the area threaten to alter the battlefield’s topography. Construction associated
with the refurbishment of a 1920’s era golf course located within the Fort Ridgely State
Park, is also of concern. Additional changes to the landscapes of both battlefields will
continue as large farms are subdivided into smaller parcels. Due to the isolated locations
of the two battlefields, subdivision can be considered a long-term threat.

Figure 2: View of
Sioux positions
along the bluffs to
the north of the
Minnesota
Volunteers’ camp
at Wood Lake
battlefield.
Photograph by
Paul Hawke, 2007.

1

Using a GIS program, the ABPP calculated that the Study Areas for the two battlefields in Minnesota represent 2,501.04 acres.
Using a GIS prgram, the ABPP calculated that the Potential National Register Boundaries for the two battlefields in Minnesota
represent 2,501.04 acres.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

2

5

Method Statement
Congress instructed the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American Battlefield
Protection Program (ABPP), to report on changes in the condition of the battlefields since
1993 and on “preservation activities” and “other relevant developments” carried out at
each battlefield since 1993. To fulfill those assignments, the ABPP 1) conducted a site
survey of each battlefield, and 2) prepared and sent out questionnaires to battlefield
managers and advocacy organizations (see Appendix D).

Research and Field Surveys
The surveys entailed additional historical research, on-the-ground documentation and
assessment of site conditions, identification of impending threats to each site, and site
mapping. Surveyors used a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver to map historic
features of each battlefield and used a Geographic Information System (GIS) program to
draw site boundaries. The ABPP retains all final survey materials. Each battlefield survey
file includes a survey form (field notes, list of defining features, list of documentary
sources, and a photo log), photographs, spatial coordinates of significant features, and
boundaries described on USGS topographic maps. The surveys did not include
archeological investigations for reasons of time and expense.
Study Areas and Core Areas
The CWSAC identified a Study Area and a Core Area for each of the principal battlefields it
surveyed (see Figure 3). The CWSAC boundaries have proven invaluable as guides to local
land and resource preservation efforts at Civil War battlefields. Since 1993 however, the
National Park Service has refined its battlefield survey methodology, which include
research, working with site stewards, identifying and documenting lines of approach and
withdrawal used by opposing forces, and applying the concepts of military terrain analysis
to all battlefield landscapes. The ABPP’s Battlefield Survey Manual explains the field
methods employed during this study.3 The surveys also incorporate the concepts
recommended in the National Register of Historic Places’ Guidelines for Identifying,
Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, which was published in 1992
after the CWSAC completed its original assessments of the battlefields.4
Using its refined methodology, ABPP was able to research and delineate new boundaries
on the previously un-surveyed Civil War battlefields in Minnesota (see Table 1). At each of
the battlefields, application of the refined methodology resulted a Study Area and Core
Area that reflect the historical area of the battle and area of heaviest fighting respectively.
It is important to note that the Study Area and Core Area boundaries are simply historical
boundaries that describe where the battle took place; neither indicates the current
integrity of the battlefield landscape, so neither can be used on its own to identify
surviving portions of battlefield land that may merit protection and preservation.

3

American Battlefield Protection Program, “Battlefield Survey Manual,” (Washington, DC: National Park Service, revised 2007).
National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, 1992 , Revised
1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources Division).
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

4

6

Potential National Register Boundaries
To address the question of what part of the
battlefield remains reasonably intact and
warrants preservation, this study introduced a
third boundary line that was not attempted
by the CWSAC: the Potential National
Register boundary (see Figure 3).
Looking at each Study Area, the surveyors
assigned PotNR boundaries where they
judged that the landscape retained enough
integrity to convey the significance of the
historic battle. In a few cases, the PotNR
boundary encompasses the entire Study Area.
In most cases, however, the PotNR boundary
includes less land than identified in the full
Study Area.
In assigning PotNR boundaries, the ABPP
followed National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) guidelines when identifying and
mapping areas that retain integrity and
cohesion within the Study Areas.5 Because the
ABPP focuses only on areas of battle however,
the Program did not evaluate lands adjacent
to the Study Area that may contribute to a
broader historical and chronological
definition of “cultural landscape.” Lands
outside of the Study Area associated with
other historic events and cultural practices
may need to be evaluated in preparation for a
formal nomination of the cultural landscape.
Most importantly, the PotNR boundary does
not constitute a formal determination of
eligibility by the Keeper of the National
Register of Historic Places.6 The PotNR
boundary is designed to be used as a planning
tool for government agencies and the public.
Like the Study and Core Area boundaries, the
PotNR boundary places no restriction on
private property use.

Figure 3: Boundary Definitions
The Study Area represents the historic
extent of the battle as it unfolded across the
landscape. The Study Area contains resources
known to relate to or contribute to the battle
event: where troops maneuvered and
deployed, immediately before, during, and
after combat, and where they fought during
combat. Historic accounts, terrain analysis,
and feature identification inform the
delineation of the Study Area boundary. The
Study Area indicates the extent to which
historic and archeological resources
associated with the battle (areas of combat,
command, communications, logistics, medical
services, etc.) may be found. Surveyors
delineated Study Area boundaries for every
battle site that was positively identified
through research and field survey, regardless
of its present integrity.
The Core Area represents the areas of
fighting on the battlefield. Positions that
delivered or received fire, and the intervening
space and terrain between them, fall within
the Core Area. Frequently described as
“hallowed ground,” land within the Core
Area is often the first to be targeted for
protection. There may be more than one
Core Area on a battlefield, but all lie within
the Study Area.
Unlike the Study and Core Areas, which are
based only upon the interpretation of historic
events, the Potential National Register
(PotNR) boundary represents ABPP’s
assessment of a Study Area’s current integrity
(the surviving landscape and features that
convey the site’s historic sense of place). The
PotNR boundary may include all or some of
the Study Area, and all or some of the Core
Area. Lands within PotNR boundaries should
be considered worthy of further attention,
although future evaluations may reveal more
or less integrity than indicated by the ABPP
surveys.

The term integrity, as defined by the NRHP, is
“the ability of a property to convey its

5

For general guidance about integrity issues and National Register of Historic Places properties, see National Park Service, How to
Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, revised 1997). The survey
evaluations described above do not meet the more stringent integrity standards for National Historic Landmark designation. See
National Park Service, How to Prepare National Historic Landmark Nominations (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior,
1999), 36-37.
6
See 36 CFR 60.1- 14 for regulations about nominating a property to the National Register of Historic Places and 36 CFR 63 for
regulations concerning Determinations of Eligibility for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

7

significance.”7 While assessments of integrity are traditionally based on seven specific
attributes – location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association –
battlefields are unique cultural resources and require special evaluation.“ Generally, the
most important aspects of integrity for battlefields are location, setting, feeling and
association,” and the most basic test for determining the integrity of any battlefield is to
assess “whether a participant in the battle would recognize the property as it exists
today.”8
Other conditions contribute to the degree of integrity a battlefield retains:
•

the quantity and quality of surviving battle-period resources (e.g.,
buildings, roads, fence lines, military structures, and archeological
features);

•

the quantity and quality of the spatial relationships between and among
those historic resources and the landscape that connects them;

•

the extent to which current battlefield land use is similar to battle-period
land use; and

•

the extent to which a battlefield’s physical features and overall character
visually communicates an authentic sense of the sweep and setting of the
battle.

The degree to which post-war development has altered and fragmented the historic
landscape or destroyed historic features and viewsheds is critical when assessing integrity.
Changes in traditional land use over time do not generally diminish a battlefield’s
integrity. For example, landscapes that were farmland during the Civil War do not need to
be in agricultural use today to be considered eligible for listing in the NRHP so long as the
land retains its historic rural character. Similarly, natural changes in vegetation – woods
growing out of historic farm fields, for example – do not necessarily lessen the landscape’s
integrity.
Some post-battle development is expected; slight or moderate change within the
battlefield may not substantially diminish a battlefield’s integrity. A limited degree of
residential, commercial, or industrial development is acceptable. These post-battle “noncontributing” elements are often included in the PotNR boundary in accordance with
NRHP guidelines.9
Significant changes in land use since the Civil War do diminish the integrity of the
battlefield landscape. Heavy residential, commercial, and industrial development; cellular
tower and wind turbine installation; and large highway construction are common
examples of such changes. Battlefield landscapes with these types of changes are
generally considered as having little or no integrity.
7

National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992 , Revised 1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources
Division), http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf. Archeological integrity was not examined during this
study, but should be considered in future battlefield studies and formal nominations to the National Register.
8
National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992 , Revised 1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources
Division).
9
The ABPP looks only at the battle-related elements of a cultural landscape. Post-battle elements, while not contributing to the
significance of the battlefield, may be eligible for separate listing in the National Register on their own merits.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

8

The PotNR boundaries therefore indicate which battlefields are likely eligible for future
listing in the NRHP and likely deserving of future preservation efforts. If a surveyor
determined that a battlefield was entirely compromised by land use incompatible with the
preservation of historic features (i.e., it has little or no integrity), the ABPP did not assign a
PotNR boundary.10
In cases where a battlefield is already listed in the NRHP, surveyors reassessed the existing
documentation based on current scholarship and resource integrity, and, when
appropriate, provided new information and proposed new boundaries as part of the
surveys. As a result, some PotNR boundaries will contain or share a boundary with lands
already listed in the NRHP. In other cases, PotNR boundaries will exclude listed lands that
have lost integrity (see Table 3.)11
The data from which all three boundaries are drawn do not necessarily reflect the full
research needed for a formal NRHP nomination. PotNR boundaries are based on an
assessment of aboveground historic features associated with the cultural and natural
landscape. The surveys did not include a professional archeological inventory or
assessment of subsurface features or indications. In some cases, future archeological
testing will help determine whether subsurface features remain, whether subsurface battle
features convey important information about a battle or historic property, and whether
that information may help to confirm, refine, or refute the boundaries previously
determined by historic studies and terrain analysis.
The ABPP survey information should be reassessed during future compliance processes
such as the Section 106 process required by the National Historic Preservation Act 12 and
Environmental Impact Statements/Environmental Assessments required by the National
Environmental Policy Act.13 Likewise, more detailed research and assessments should take
place when any battlefield is formally nominated to the NRHP or proposed for designation
as a National Historic Landmark (NHL). New research and intensive-level surveys of these
sites will enlighten future preservation and compliance work. Agencies should continue to
consult local and state experts for up-to-date information about these battlefields.
On the Fort Ridgely battlefield, the 440 acres of the Fort Ridgely State Park have been
listed in the NRHP. The area was listed for its overall place in history and not specifically for
the Civil War battle.
1,113.38 acres of the Wood Lake battlefield was listed in the NRHP in 2010 as the Wood

Lake Battlefield Historic District. The area was specifically listed as a battlefield landscape
for its association with the Civil War battle of Wood Lake.

10

National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992 , Revised 1999 (http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf), offers recommendations
regarding "Selecting Defensible Boundaries." While this document indicates that "generally, boundaries should not be drawn to
include the portion of the route taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters," the Guidelines also state that "a basic
principle is to include within the boundary all of the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took
actions based on their assumption of being in the presence of the enemy." The ABPP interprets this latter guidance to mean all
military activities that influenced the battle. See the individual battlefield profiles for information about military actions taken along
the routes included. In accordance with the methodology of this study, if routes included in the Study Area retain integrity, they are
included within the Potential National Register boundary for the battlefield landscape.
11
The ABPP’s surveys and PotNR assessments do not constitute formal action on behalf of the office of the National Register of
Historic Places. PotNR assessments are intended for planning purposes only; they do not carry the authority to add, change, or
remove an official listing.
12
16 USC 470f.
13
42 USC 4331-4332.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

9

Questionnaires
While the ABPP maintains data about its own program activities at Civil War battlefields,
most preservation work occurs at the local level. Therefore, to answer Congress's directive
for information about battlefield preservation activities, the ABPP sought input from local
battlefield managers and advocacy organizations. The ABPP distributed questionnaires
designed to gather information about the types of preservation activities that have taken
place at the battlefields since 1993. The Questionnaire is reproduced in Appendix D.
In Minnesota, representatives from two organizations provided information. Their
responses, combined with the survey findings, allowed the ABPP to create a profile of
conditions and activities at Fort Ridgely and Wood Lake.

Figure 4. The ravine used by the Santee Sioux to advance on Fort Ridgely from the north. The
ravine is within the boundaries of Fort Ridgely State Park. Photograph by Paul Hawke, 2007

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

10

Summary of Conditions of Civil War Battlefields in Minnesota
Quantified Land Areas
Using a Geographic Information Systems program, the ABPP calculated the amount of land
historically associated with the battle (Study Area), the amount of land where forces were
engaged (Core Area), and the amount of land that may retain enough integrity to be
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and that remains to be
protected (Potential National Register boundary).
As noted above and as Table 1 illustrates, the Study Areas and Core Areas of Minnesota’s
Civil War battlefields have been established in accordance with ABPP research and field
survey methodology. Particular attention was paid to identifying the routes of approach
and withdrawal associated with each battle, and to identifying areas of secondary action
that influenced the course or outcome of the battles.14 The Study Area and Core Area
boundaries established for each battlefield take these movements and actions into
account, recognizing the extent to which theses ancillary areas serve as battlefield
features.

Table 1. Battlefield Area Statistics
Study Area

Core Area

Fort Ridgely (MN001)

1,307.13

242.85

PotNR
Boundary
1,307.13

Wood Lake (MN002)*

1,774.99

701.24

1,774.99

Battlefield

*No CWSAC boundaries were established in 1993. The ABPP established new boundaries in 2010.

Condition Assessments
Using field survey data, the ABPP assessed the overall condition of each battlefield’s Study
Area.15 While no battlefield remains completely unaltered since the Civil War, Wood Lake
has suffered little alteration to the character-defining features of its landscape. Portions
of Fort Ridgely’s landscape has been altered by mining and development, but most of its
battlefield defining features remain intact.
Wood Lake is in excellent condition. Land use here is little changed since the time of the
Civil War. Only a few modern residences and roads intrude on the landscape. Subdivision
of large farms into smaller parcels could pose a threat to the battlefield, but changes to
the landscape appear to be slow and accumulative.
Fort Ridgely is in very good condition with some modern intrusions, but the topography
still easily conveys the landscape’s historic character. Within the Study Area, the State of
14

National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America's Historic Battlefields
(http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf), offers recommendations regarding "Selecting Defensible
Boundaries." While this document indicates that "generally, boundaries should not be drawn to include the portion of the route
taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters," the Guidelines also state that "a basic principle is to include within the
boundary all of the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took actions based on their assumption
of being in the presence of the enemy." The ABPP interprets this latter guidance to mean all military activities that influenced the
battle. See the individual battlefield profiles for information about military actions taken along the routes included. In accordance
with the methodology of this study, if routes included in the Study Area retain integrity, they are included within the Potential
National Register boundary for the battlefield landscape.
15
The condition of archeological resources within the battlefields was not assessed. Future studies are needed to determine the
degree of archeological integrity associated with subsurface battle deposits.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota
11

Minnesota’s Fort Ridgely State Park encompasses more than 649 acres, 20 acres of which
are administered by the Minnesota Historical Society as the Fort Ridgely Historic Site. The
remaining 629 acres of the state park are used for recreation. Amenities include a 1920’s
era nine hole golf course, camping and picnic areas, and a playground. In 2007,
construction was begun on the restoration of the nine hole golf course which surrounds
the 20 acre historic site. Modern construction methods could present a threat to the
landscape around the fort and may result in damage to the battlefield terrain and
archeological resources. Gravel and kaolin mining impact the battlefield and any new
mines will decimate portions of the landscape. There is also new residential construction
in the area as farms subdivide into smaller parcels.

Table 2. Condition Summary
Condition

Battlefield

Land use is little Changed (1)

Wood Lake

Portions of landscape have been altered, but most
essential features remain (1)

Fort Ridgely

Much of the landscape has been altered and fragmented,
leaving some essential features (0)

N/A

Landscape and terrain have been altered beyond
recognition (0)

N/A

Battlefields that were not assessed (0)

N/A

Registration
The nation’s official method for recognizing historic properties worthy of preservation is
listing in the NRHP. Registered battlefields (those listed in the NRHP) meet national
standards for documentation, physical integrity, and demonstrable significance to the
history of our nation. Federal, state, and local agencies use information from the NRHP as
a planning tool to identify and make decisions about cultural resources. Federal and state
laws, most notably Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, require
agencies to account for the effects their projects (roads, wetland permits, quarrying, cell
towers, etc.) may have on listed and eligible historic properties, such as battlefields. Listing
allows project designers to quickly identify the battlefield and avoid or minimize impacts
to the landscape.
Properties listed in the NRHP may also be eligible for federal and state historic
preservation grant programs. Recognition as an NRHP listed battlefield can advance public
understanding of and appreciation for the battlefield, and may encourage advocacy for its
preservation.16

16

There are three levels of federal recognition for historic properties: Congressional designations such as national park units,
National Historic Landmarks, and listings in the National Register of Historic Places. Congress creates national park units. The
Secretary of the Interior designates National Historic Landmarks (NHL) – nationally significant historic sites – for their exceptional
value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the heritage of the United States. The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is
the nation’s official list of cultural sites significant at the national, state, or local level and worthy of preservation. Historic units of
the National Park System and NHLs are also listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota
12

Fort Ridgely is listed in the NRHP as an historic district for its contribution to U.S. history
from 1850–1874. While the Civil War battle is discussed in the Fort Ridgely NRHP
nomination, the nomination is for the fort itself and not for the battle specifically. The
battlefield landscape merits its own listing in the NRHP inclusive of lands nominated in
1970 under the Fort Ridgely historic district. The 1,307 acres of the Study Area, all of
which retain integrity, should be considered for inclusion in the NRHP as a battlefield
landscape.
Wood Lake’s entire 1,774.99 acre Study Area retains integrity and 1,113.38 acres (63
percent) have been listed in the NRHP. The remaining 661.61 acres, 37 percent of the
battlefield are not listed and should be considered for inclusion in the existing NRHP
listing.

Table 3. Acres Registered Compared with Acres Potentially
Eligible to be Registered
Battlefield

Designation

ABPP PotNR
Acres

Existing
Registered
Acres

Acres
Potentially
Eligible to be
Registerted

Fort Ridgely (MN001)

NRHP

1,307.13

409.68

819.63

Wood Lake (MN002)

NRHP

1,774.99

1,113.38

661.61

Stewardship
For the purposes of this update, “protected land” means battlefield land that is in public
or private non-profit ownership, or is under permanent protective easement, and is
managed specifically for 1) the purposes of maintaining the historic character of the
landscape and for preventing future impairment or destruction of the landscape and
historic features, or for 2) a conservation purpose and use compatible with the goals of
historic landscape preservation.
The ABPP established this definition because, while public ownership of land often
provides some level of protection for historic resources, it does not necessarily foreclose
the potential for damage. Federal, state, and municipal ownership may prevent private
development, and public ownership may require compliance with state and federal
environmental laws, but the primary uses (military readiness, timber production,
recreation, mineral extraction, impoundment, etc.) of that public land may not be
compatible with the perpetual protection and appropriate management of a battlefield
landscape.
The Minnesota Historical Society owns one acre of land at Wood Lake, which Is
maintained as a roadside commemorative area. At Fort Ridgely, the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources manages 649 acres within the 1,307 acre Study Area as
Fort Ridgely State Park. The park is used primarily as a recreational facility. In agreement
with the state park, 20 acres are administered by the Minnesota Historical Society as the
Fort Ridgely Historic Site. The Minnesota Historical Society has given day-to-day operation
of the historic site to the Nicolette County Historical Society.
The battlefields at both Fort Ridgely and Wood Lake would benefit from comprehensive
planning to foster coordination among public owners, private non-profits, and private
landowners to preserve the historic landscapes. Because so much of these battlefields are
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

13

in good condition, there is an excellent opportunity for additional protective measures
such as easement purchases.
Landscape preservation efforts in other states have benefited greatly from the purchase of
development rights in the form of conservation easements. Used in conjunction with or
instead of a traditional fee simple purchase, conservation easements are one of the most
successful preservation and stewardship tools available for protecting battlefields. This
type of easement allows private property owners to keep their land while receiving tax
benefits for donating the easement. The federal government provides income tax credits
to private property owners who donate conservation easements that permanently protect
historic land.
Today only 21 acres, 0.84 percent of Civil War battlefield land in Minnesota, is permanently
protected for its historic significance.

Table 4. Protective Stewardship of Intact Battlefield Land
ABPP PotNR
Acres

Permanently
Protected Acres

Unprotected,
Intact Acres Remaining

Fort Ridgely (MN001)

1,307.13

20.00*

1,287.13

Wood Lake (MN002)

1,774.99

1.00

1,773.99

Total

3,082.12

22.00

3,061.12

Battlefield

*While 649 acres of the Fort Ridgely battlefield are protected as part of Fort Ridgely State Park , only 20
acres are protected for their historic signifigance.

Figure 5: The ruins and site of
historic Fort Ridgely are
administered by the Minnesota
Historical Society as Fort Ridgely
Historic Site. Photograph by Paul
Hawke, 2007.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

14

Public Access and Interpretation
In its questionnaire (see Appendix D), the ABPP asked battlefield stewards about the types
of public access and interpretation available at the battlefield. The ABPP did not collect
information about the purpose or intent of the interpretation and access, such as whether
a wayside exhibit was developed for purely educational reasons, to promote heritage
tourism, or to boost local economic development.
The ABPP asked respondents to indicate the type of interpretation available at or about
the battlefield. The categories included brochures, driving tours, living history
demonstrations, maintained historic features or areas, walking tours and trails, wayside
exhibits, websites, and other specialized programs. The results indicate that both of the
Civil War battlefields in Minnesota offer some degree of public interpretation.
There is limited interpretation at Wood Lake. The Minnesota Historical Society maintains
a one-acre wayside exhibit. The pull-off includes a stone commemorative obelisk and
interpretive markers. In addition, there is a brochure of the battle provided by the Wood
Lake Battlefield Preservation Association and an easement on 54 acres of the battlefield
that allows self-guided tours to a portion of the battle terrain.
At Fort Ridgely the Fort Ridgely Historic Site contains the historic fort, which is the focus
of interpretation of the battle. Numerous interpretive markers and a visitor center tell the
story of the battle and the combatants.
Additional details regarding the interpretation activities undertaken at the two
battlefields are included in the Individual Battlefield Profiles section of this report.

Figure 6: Interpretive
ground markers
showing the
directional locations of
both U.S. troops and
Sioux warriors during
the battle of Fort
Ridgely. The Fort
Ridgely Historic Site
has numerous
interpretive areas that
allow visitors to
discover and explore
the history of the fort
and the battle.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

15

Advoca
acy
Nonprof organizat
fit
tions play im
mportant ro
oles in prote
ecting historic battlefie
elds. These
organiza
ations step in to preserv historic s
i
ve
sites when p
public fundi
ing and management f
for
historic p
preservation are absent. When pu
n
ublic fundin is availab nonprof serve as vital
ng
ble,
fits
partners in public-p
s
private prese
ervation eff
forts, acting as conduits for public funds, raising
s
critical p
private matc
ching funds, keeping history and p
,
preservation in the pub eye, and
n
blic
d
working with lando
owners to find ways to protect bat
ttlefield par
rcels.
ttlefields in Minnesota have local a
advocacy friends group The Frie
ps.
ends of Fort
Both bat
Ridgely s
supports the state park operations and advoc
e
k
s
cates for Fo Ridgely battlefield
ort
lands ins
side the stat park bou
te
undary. The Wood Lake Battlefield Preservation Associat
e
e
d
tion
advocate for preservation of t entire battlefield at Wood Lak It is involved in
es
the
t
ke.
educatin the comm
ng
munity, com
mmemoratin the battle, and work
ng
king toward the protec
d
ction
and resto
oration of the battlefie landscap
t
eld
pe.
While ot
ther organiz
zations with more gene
h
eral historic interests may also p
cal
s
play importa
ant
roles in p
preserving Minnesota’s battlefield these two groups ar the only k
M
s
ds,
o
re
known local
organiza
ations in Minnesota dedicated sole to the go
ely
oals of Civil War battle
efield
preserva
ation.

Figure 7: A one acre pull off on th Wood Lake battlefiel commemo
he
ld
orates the battle.

Update to the Civil War Si Advisory Com
o
ites
mmission Report on the Nation’s C
Civil War Battlefields
FINAL D
DRAFT – Minneso
ota

16

Individual Battlefield Profiles
Battlefield Profile Glossary
Location

County or city in which the battlefield is located.

Campaign

Name of military campaign of which the battle was part. Campaign
names are taken from The War of the Rebellion: a Compilation of
the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies.

Battle Date(s)

Day or days upon which the battle took place, as determined by the
Civil War Sites Advisory Commission.

Principal Commanders Ranking commanders of opposing forces during the battle.
Forces Engaged
Results

Name or description of largest units engaged during the battle.
Indicates battle victor or inconclusive outcome.

Study Area

Acreage determined by the ABPP to represent the full extent of land
associated with the historic battle.

Potential National
Register Lands

Acreage of land that retains historic character and may be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places.

Protected Lands

Estimated acreage (based on questionnaires and GIS) of battlefield
land that is in public or private non-profit ownership, or is under
permanent protective easement, and is managed specifically for 1)
the purposes of maintaining the historic character of the landscape
and for preventing future impairment or destruction of the landscape
and historic features, or for 2) a conservation purpose and use
compatible with the goals of historic landscape preservation.

Publicly Accessible
Lands

Estimated acreage (based on responses to questionnaires)
within the Study Area maintained for public visitation.

Management Area

Name of historic site, park, or other area maintained for battlefield
resource protection and/or public visitation.

Friends Group(s)

Name of local advocacy organization(s) that support preservation
activities at/for the battlefield.

Preservation
Activities
Since 1993

Indicates which types of preservation activities have taken place at
the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses to questionnaires).

Public
Interpretation
Since 1993

Indicates which types of interpretation/educational activities have
taken place at the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses
to questionnaires).

Condition Statement The ABPP’s assessment of the overall condition of the battlefield’s
Study Area (based on field surveys and responses to questionnaires).
Historical Designation

Notes the most prestigious federal historical designation the
battlefield has received (i.e. national park unit, National Historic
Landmark, or National Register of Historic Places).

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

17

Fort Ridgely (MN001)
Location

Nicolett County

Campaign

Operations to Suppress the Sioux Uprising

Battle Date(s)

August 20-22, 1862

Principal Commanders

1st Lieutenant Timothy J. Sheehan [US]; Chief Little Crow [I]

Forces Engaged

Company B and Company C (detachment), Fifth Minnesota
Infantry, Renville Rangers, refugee civilians [US]; Santee Sioux [I]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

1,307.13 acres
The CWSAC did not deliniate a Study or Core Area in 1993. The newly
drawn Study and Core Areas represent the fighting in two separate
attacks on the fort (August 20 and 22).
The Study Area includes the Sioux approach route from the west, and
the areas of maneuver to the north, south, and east utilized by the
Sioux after they split their forces to attack the fort. The site of the
road used by the Federals to reinforce and supply the fort between
the two attacks has also been included to the east.
The newly drawn Core Area includes the site of Fort Ridgely, the areas
of assault against the fort, and the ravines used by the Sioux for cover.

Potential National
Register Lands

1,307.13 acres

Protected Lands

20.00 acres
State of Minnesota, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

649.85 acres
State of Minnesota

Management Area(s)
Friends Group(s)

Friends of Fort Ridgely, (2001)

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
Other

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

18

Condition Statement

Fort Ridgely is in very good condition. Some residential
development has occurred, but the main threat to battlefield lands
outside of Fort Ridgely State Park is increased gravel and kaolin
mining. New mines are planned within the Study Area and could
decimate portions of the landscape. Within the state park
reconstruction of a 1927 9-hole golf course and other recreational
development and use are not compatible with maintaining an
historic battlefield landscape and may result in damage to the
battlefield terrain and archeological resources.
The Fort Ridgely battlefield would benefit from comprehensive
planning to foster coordination among public owners, private nonprofits, and private landowners to preserve the historic landscapes.
A portion of the Study Area is listed in the National Register of
Historic Places (NRHP); however, the nomination is for the fort itself
and not for the battle specifically. The entire 1,307 acre Study Area
should be considered for inclusion in the NRHP as a battlefield
landscape.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Fort Ridgely, 1970)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

19

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

20

Wood Lake (MN002)
Location

Yellow Medicine County

Campaign

Operations to Suppress the Sioux Uprising (1862)

Battle Date(s)

September 23, 1862

Principal Commanders

Colonel Henry Hastings Sibley [US]; Chief Little Crow [I]

Forces Engaged

6th Minnesota Volunteer Infantry, other volunteers [US]; Santee
Sioux [I]

Results

Union Victory

Study Area

1,193.91 acres
The CWSAC did not deliniate a Study or Core Area in 1993. The newly
drawn Study Area includes the Federal encampment, the Sioux positions
during their surprise attack, the areas of maneuver to the north, west, and
southwest utilized by the Sioux, and the area of maneuver to the east and
southeast utilized by the Federals.
The newly drawn Core Area includes seasonal Wood Lake (which contained
water at the time of the battle), the forward portion of the Federal
encampment, the Federal artillery positions and fields of fire, the areas
containing the Federal line of battle north of the encampment, and the
bluffs used by the Sioux as high ground on which to form a line of battle.

Potential National
Register Lands

1,193.91 acres

Protected Lands

1.00 acre, Minnesota Historical Society, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

1.00 acre, Minnesota Historical Society, fee simple

Management Area(s)

None

Friends Group(s)

Wood Lake Battlefield Preservation Association (2006)

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website:
http://www.wlbpa.info

Other
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

21

Condition Statement

Overall, Wood Lake is in excellent condition. The battlefield is
primarily farm land with a few houses and farm buildings
scattered throughout. Historic views are easy to see and
understand. Most of the battlefield’s defining features, such as
the bluffs occupied by the Sioux and the seasonal lakebed, are
extant. Subdivision of large farms into smaller parcels, however,
could pose a long term threat to the battlefield.
The Wood Lake battlefield would benefit from comprehensive
planning to foster coordination among public owners, private
non-profits, and private landowners to preserve the historic
landscapes. While 63 percent of the Study Area has recently been
listed in the National Register of Historic Places, the ABPP
recommends that the remaining 37 percent be considered an
eligible battlefield resource for purposes of planning and Section
106 compliance.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Wood Lake Battlefield Historic
District, 2010)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

22

Note: The Wood Lake Battlefield National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) boundary is not represented on this
map. The boundary data is restricted by the NRHP.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

23

Appendices
Appendix A. Civil War Battlefield Land Acquisition Grants
In 1998, the ABPP began its land acquisition grant program, which helps states and local
communities purchase significant Civil War battlefield lands for permanent protection. In
2002, Congress officially authorized the program.17 Eligible battlefields are those listed in
the 1993 Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields prepared by the Congressionallychartered CWSAC. Eligible acquisition projects may be for fee interest in land or for a
protective interest such as a perpetual easement.
Congress has appropriated a total of $34.9 million for this Civil War Battlefield Land
Acquisition Grants. These grants have assisted in the permanent protection of 14,741 acres
at 59 Civil War battlefields in 14 states. Although there have been no applicants for these
grants from the State of Minnesota, both of the battlefields profiled in this report are
eligible to receive funding.

17

The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (PL 107- 359) amended the American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 USC
469k) to authorize the land acquisition grants.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

24

Appendix B. American Battlefield Protection Program Planning Grants
Through its American Battlefield Protection Program, the Federal government also
provides grants and technical advice to communities working to preserve battlefields. The
ABPP has two grant programs: planning grants and land acquisition grants.
Since 1992, the ABPP has offered annual planning grants to nonprofit organizations,
academic institutions, and local, regional, state, and tribal governments to help protect
battlefields located on American soil. Applicants are encouraged to work with partner
organizations and federal, State, and local government agencies as early as possible to
integrate their efforts into a larger battle site protection strategy. To date, Wood Lake
battlefield has received two ABPP grants totaling $89,478.00. Both of the battlefields
profiled in this report are eligible for funding.

Grantee

Year

Project Title

Woodlake Battlefield
Preservation Association

2008

Documentation/Archeology

$42,478.00

Woodlake Battlefield
Preservation Association

2010

Historic Preservation Plan

$47,000.00

Total

$89,478.00

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

Award

25

Appendix C. Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002
Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December 2002
Amends the American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k)

An Act
To amend the American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior
to establish a battlefield acquisition grant program.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ``Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002''.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
(a) Findings.--Congress finds the following
(1) Civil War battlefields provide a means for the people of
the United States to understand a tragic period in the history
of the United States.
(2) According to the Report on the Nation's Civil War
Battlefields, prepared by the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission, and dated July 1993, of the 384 principal Civil War
battlefields-(A) almost 20 percent are lost or fragmented;
(B) 17 percent are in poor condition; and
(C) 60 percent have been lost or are in imminent
danger of being fragmented by development and lost as
coherent historic sites.
(b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-(1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect
nationally significant Civil War battlefields through
conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
(2) to create partnerships among State and local
governments, regional entities, and the private sector to
preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil War
battlefields.
SEC. 3. BATTLEFIELD ACQUISITION GRANT PROGRAM.
The American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k) is amended-(1) by redesignating subsection (d) as paragraph (3) of
subsection (c), and indenting appropriately;
(2) in paragraph (3) of subsection (c) (as redesignated by
paragraph (1))-(A) by striking ``Appropriations'' and inserting
``appropriations''; and
(B) by striking ``section'' and inserting
``subsection'';
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

26

(3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following
``(d) Battlefield Acquisition Grant Program.-``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection
``(A) Battlefield report.--The term `Battlefield
Report' means the document entitled `Report on the
Nation's Civil War Battlefields', prepared by the Civil
War Sites Advisory Commission, and dated July 1993.
``(B) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity'
means a State or local government.
``(C) Eligible site.--The term `eligible site' means
a site-``(i) that is not within the exterior
boundaries of a unit of the National Park System;
and
``(ii) that is identified in the Battlefield
Report.
``(D) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the
Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American
Battlefield Protection Program.
``(2) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a
battlefield acquisition grant program under which the Secretary
may provide grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share
of the cost of acquiring interests in eligible sites for the
preservation and protection of those eligible sites.
``(3) Nonprofit partners.--An eligible entity may acquire an
interest in an eligible site using a grant under this subsection
in partnership with a nonprofit organization.
``(4) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the total
cost of acquiring an interest in an eligible site under this
subsection shall be not less than 50 percent.
``(5) Limitation on land use.--An interest in an eligible
site acquired under this subsection shall be subject to section
6(f)(3) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16
U.S.C. 460l-8(f)(3)).
``(6) Reports.-``(A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the
date of the enactment of this subparagraph, the
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the
activities carried out under this subsection.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--Not later than
2 years after the date of the enactment of this
subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a
report that updates the Battlefield Report to reflect-``(i) preservation activities carried out at
the 384 battlefields during the period between
publication of the Battlefield Report and the
update;
``(ii) changes in the condition of the
battlefields during that period; and
``(iii) any other relevant developments
relating to the battlefields during that period.
``(7) Authorization of appropriations.-``(A) In general.--There are authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary from the Land and Water
Conservation Fund to provide grants under this
subsection $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

27

through 2008.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--There are
authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry
out paragraph (6)(B), $500,000.''; and
(4) in subsection (e)-(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``as of'' and all
that follows through the period and inserting ``on
September 30, 2008.''; and
(B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and provide
battlefield acquisition grants'' after ``studies''.

-end-

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

28

Appendix D. Battlefield Questionnaire
State
Battlefield
Person Completing Form
Date of completion

I. Protected Lands of the Battlefield (“Protected lands” are these “owned” for historic
preservation or conservation purposes. Please provide information on land protected since 1993.)
1) Identify protected lands by parcel since 1993. Then answer these questions about each parcel,
following example in the chart below. What is the acreage of each parcel? Is parcel owned fee
simple, by whom? Is there is an easement, if so name easement holder? Was the land purchased or
the easement conveyed after 1993? What was cost of purchase or easement? What was source of
funding and the amount that source contributed? Choose from these possible sources: Coin money,
LWCF, Farm Bill, State Government, Local Government, Private Owner, Private Non-Profit (provide
name), or Other (describe).
Parcel

Acres Owner

Easement Year

Cost

Source

Joe Smith Farm

194

Private

SHPO

1995

$500,000

LWCF/$250,000
Private/$250,000

Sue Jones Tract

16

Battlefield Friends, Inc. No

2002

$41,000

State/$20,000
BFI/$21,000

2) Other public or non-profit lands within the battlefield? (Y/N)
•

If yes, describe

•

Name of public or non-profit owner or easement holder

•

Number of Acres owned/held

3) Is the information in a GIS? (Y/N)
If yes, may NPS obtain a copy of the data? (Y/N)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

29

II. Preservation Groups
Is there a formal interested entity (friends group, etc) associated with the battlefield? (Y/N)
If yes
Name
Address
Phone
Fax
E-mail
Web site? (Y/N)
If yes, what is the URL?
Does the web site have a preservation message? (Y/N)
What year did the group form?

III. Public Access and Interpretation
1) Does the site have designated Public Access? (Y/N) (Count public roads if there are designated
interpretive signs or pull-offs)
If yes, what entity provides the public access (Access may occur on lands owned in fee or under
easement to the above entities)
Private Nonprofit organization
Private owner
Other

Federal government
State government
Local government
Name of entity (if applicable)

Number of Acres Accessible to the Public (size of the area in which the public may physically visit
without trespassing. Do not include viewsheds.)

2) Does the site have interpretation? (Y/N)
If yes, what type of interpretation is available?
Visitor Center
Brochure(s)
Wayside exhibits
Driving Tour
Walking Tour

Audio tour tapes
Maintained historic features/areas
Living History
Website
Other

IV. Registration
Applies only to the battlefield landscape, not to individual contributing features of a battlefield
(i.e., the individually listed Dunker Church property of .2 acres does not represent the Antietam
battlefield for the purposes of this exercise)
1) Is the site a designated National Historic Landmark? (Y/N)
If yes, NHL and ID Number
2) Is the site listed in the National Register? (Y/N)
If yes, NRHP Name and ID Number
3) Is the site listed in the State Register? (Y/N)
If yes, State Register Name and ID Number
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

30

4) Is the site in the State Inventory? (Y/N)
If yes, State Inventory Name and ID Number
5)

Is the site designated as a local landmark or historic site? (Y/N)
Type of Designation/Listing

V. Program Activities
What types of preservation program activities have occurred at the battlefield? Provide
final product name and date if applicable (e.g., Phase I Archeological Survey Report on the
Piper Farm, 1994 and Antietam Preservation Plan, 2001, etc.)
1) Research and Documentation

2) Cultural Resource surveys and inventories (building/structure and landscape inventories,
archeological surveys, landscape surveys, etc.)

3) Planning Projects (preservation plans, site management plans, cultural landscape
reports, etc.)

4) Interpretation Projects (also includes education)

5) Advocacy (any project meant to engage the public in a way that would benefit the
preservation of the site, e.g. PR, lobbying, public outreach, petitioning for action, etc.)

6) Legislation (any local, state, or federal legislation designed to encourage preservation of
the battlefield individually or together with other similar sites)

7) Fundraising
a. To support program activities?

b. To support land acquisition/easements?

8) Other

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
FINAL DRAFT – Minnesota

31


