U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
State of Ohio
Washington, DC
August 2009

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
State of Ohio
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program
Washington, DC
August 2009

Authority
The American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996, as amended by the Civil War
Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December
2002), directs the Secretary of the Interior to update the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields.

Acknowledgments
NPS Project Team Paul Hawke, Project Leader; Kathleen Madigan, Survey Coordinator;
Tanya Gossett and January Ruck, Reporting; Shannon Davis, Preservation Specialist;
Matthew Borders, Historian; Renee S. Novak and Gweneth Langdon, Interns.
Battlefield Surveyor(s) Joseph E. Brent, Mudpuppy and Waterdog, Inc.
Respondents Franco Ruffini, Ohio Historical Society; George Kane, Ohio Historical
Society; G. Michael Pratt, Heidelberg University; Ed Sharp and Eric J. Wittenberg,
Buffington Island Battlefield Preservation Foundation.

Cover: Historic Chester Road, Buffington Island battlefield, Meigs County, Ohio.
Photograph by Joseph E. Brent, 2005.

Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................... 3
SYNOPSIS .......................................................................................................... 4
METHOD STATEMENT ........................................................................................... 6
Research and Field Surveys ................................................................................... 6
Questionnaires ...................................................................................................... 9
SUMMARY OF CONDITIONS OF OHIO’S CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELDS .............................. 10
Quantified Land Areas ........................................................................................ 10
Condition Assessments ........................................................................................ 10
Registration ......................................................................................................... 11
Stewardship ......................................................................................................... 12
Public Access and Interpretation ........................................................................ 13
Local Advocacy .................................................................................................... 14
INDIVIDUAL BATTLEFIELD PROFILES ...................................................................... 15
Buffington Island (OH001) .................................................................................. 16
Salineville (OH002) .............................................................................................. 19
APPENDICES ..................................................................................................... 22
Appendix A.
Appendix B.
Appendix C.
Appendix D.

Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 ............................ 22
Battlefield Questionnaire ............................................................. 25
Civil War Battlefield Land Acquisition Grants ............................. 29
American Battlefield Protection Program Planning Grants ....... 30

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

2

Introduction
The information in this report fulfills, in part, the purposes of the Civil War Battlefield
Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016). Those purposes are:
1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect nationally significant Civil
War battlefields through conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
2) to create partnerships among state and local governments, regional entities, and
the private sector to preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil
War battlefields.
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 directs the Secretary of the Interior,
acting through the American Battlefield Protection Program (ABPP) of the National Park
Service, to update the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s
Civil War Battlefields. The CWSAC was established by Congress in 1991 and published its
report in 1993. Congress provided funding for this update in FY 2005 and FY 2007.
Congress asked that the updated report reflect the following:
•
•
•

Preservation activities carried out at the 384 battlefields identified by the CWSAC
during the period between 1993 and the update;
Changes in the condition of the battlefields during that period; and
Any other relevant developments relating to the battlefields during that period.

In accordance with the legislation, this report presents information about Civil War
battlefields in Virginia for use by Congress, federal, state, and local government agencies,
landowners, and other interest groups. Other state reports will be issued as surveys and
analyses are completed.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

3

Synopsis
Although Buffington Island and Salineville were included in the 1993 report as among
the most significant battles in the Civil War, the CWSAC did not survey these battlefields or
evaluate their condition. In 2005, the ABPP surveyed Buffington Island and Salineville.
This report provides new baseline information about both. ABPP found Ohio’s battlefields
to be in good condition and worthy of preservation and protection.
Since the Civil War, land use within most of the Buffington Island Study Area has
remained agricultural. One exception is the gravel mining that is occurring in the heart of
the Core Area. At Salineville, coal mining and residential development on portions of
the battlefield have altered the landscape’s appearance more extensively, but many
essential features, such as the ravine that offered concealment to Confederate forces,
survive.
Given the nature of these conditions and the potential for the expansion of existing
threats to Ohio’s battlefields, land and cultural resource protection at Buffington Island
and Salineville should be the focus of intensified local, state, and federal battlefield
preservation efforts within the next three to five years.
Because no survey data was collected for Buffington Island and Salineville in 1993, the
CWSAC was unable to assign Preservation Priority rankings within its original study for the
two battlefields. As part of the field research undertaken for this update, conditions at
the two battlefields have been assessed and the ABPP has established boundaries for
Buffington Island and Salineville. Once all CWSAC battlefields nationwide have been
reassessed and all state updates have been completed, the National Park Service will
establish relative priority rankings for Buffington Island and Salineville.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

4

Figure 1. CWSAC Battlefields in Ohio – Buffington Island and Salineville.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

5

Method Statement
Congress instructed the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American Battlefield
Protection Program (ABPP), to report on changes in the condition of the battlefields since
1993 and on “preservation activities” and “other relevant developments” carried out at
each battlefield since 1993. To fulfill those assignments, the ABPP 1) conducted site
surveys of each battlefield and 2) prepared and sent out questionnaires to battlefield
managers and advocacy organizations (see Appendix B).

Research and Field Surveys
The ABPP conducted the field assessments of Ohio battlefields in November 2005 The
surveys entailed additional historical research, on-the-ground documentation and
assessment of site conditions, identification of impending threats to each site, and site
mapping. Surveyors used Global Positioning System (GPS) to map historic features of each
battlefield and used a Geographic Information System (GIS) to draw site boundaries. The
ABPP retains all final survey materials. Each battlefield survey file includes a survey form
(field notes, list of defining features, list of documentary sources, and a photo log),
photographs, spatial coordinates of significant features, and boundaries described on
USGS topographic maps. The surveys did not include archeological investigations for
reasons of time and expense.
Study Areas and Core Areas
The CWSAC included Buffington Island and Salineville in its 1993 report as among the
most significant battles of the Civil War. However, the CWSAC did not survey either site
and so did not establish Study and Core Areas for these two battlefields.
The ABPP applied its survey method to create new Study and Core Areas for Buffington
Island and Salineville. That method includes research, working with site stewards,
identifying and documenting lines of approach and withdrawal used by opposing forces,
and applying the concepts of military terrain analysis to all battlefield landscapes. The
ABPP’s Battlefield Survey Manual explains the field methods employed during this study.1
The surveys also incorporate the concepts recommended in the National Register of
Historic Places’ Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, which was published in 1992.
However, it is important to note that the Study Area and Core Area boundaries are simply
historical boundaries that describe where the battle took place; neither indicates the
current integrity of the battlefield landscape, so neither can be used on its own to identify
surviving portions of battlefield land that may merit protection and preservation (see
Figure 2).

1

American Battlefield Protection Program, “Battlefield Survey Manual,” (Washington, DC: National Park Service, revised 2007),
http://www.nps.gov/history/abpp/battlefieldsurveymanual.pdf , October 2008.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

6

Potential National Register
Boundaries
To address the question of what part of
the battlefield remains reasonably intact
and warrants preservation, this study
introduced a third boundary line that was
not attempted by the CWSAC: the
Potential National Register boundary (see
Figure 2).
Looking at each Study Area, the surveyors
assigned PotNR boundaries where they
judged that enough of the battlefield
landscape remained to convey the
significance of the engagement. In a few
cases, the PotNR boundary encompasses
the entire Study Area. In most cases,
however, the PotNR boundary includes
less land than identified in the full Study
Area.
In assigning PotNR boundaries, the ABPP
followed National Register of Historic
Places guidelines when identifying and
mapping areas that retain integrity and
cohesion within the Study Areas.2
However, because the ABPP focuses only
on areas of battle, the ABPP did not
evaluate lands adjacent to the Study Area
that may contribute to a broader
historical and chronological definition of
“cultural landscape.” Lands outside of
the Study Area associated with other
historic events and cultural practices may
need to be evaluated in preparation for a
formal nomination of the cultural
landscape.

Figure 2: Boundary Definitions
The Study Area represents the historic extent
of the battle as it unfolded across the
landscape. The Study Area contains resources
known to relate to or contribute to the battle
event: where troops maneuvered and
deployed, immediately before and after
combat, and where they fought during
combat. Historic accounts, terrain analysis,
and feature identification inform the
delineation of the Study Area boundary. The
Study Area indicates the extent to which
historic and archeological resources associated
with the battle (areas of combat, command,
communications, logistics, medical services,
etc.) may be found and protected. Surveyors
delineated Study Area boundaries for every
battle site that was positively identified
through research and field survey, regardless
of its present integrity.
The Core Area represents the areas of
fighting on the battlefield. Positions that
delivered or received fire, and the intervening
space and terrain between them, fall within
the Core Area. Frequently described as
“hallowed ground,” land within the Core
Area is often the first to be targeted for
protection. The Core Area lies within the
Study Area.
Unlike the Study and Core Areas, which are
based only upon the interpretation of historic
events, the Potential National Register
(PotNR) boundary represents ABPP’s
assessment of a Study Area’s current integrity
(the surviving landscape and features that
convey the site’s historic sense of place). The
PotNR boundary may include all or some of
the Study Area, and all or some of the Core
Area. Lands within PotNR boundaries should
be considered worthy of further attention,
although future evaluations may reveal more
or less integrity than indicated by the ABPP
surveys.

Most importantly, the PotNR boundary
does not constitute a formal
determination of eligibility by the
Keeper of the National Register of
Historic Places.3 The PotNR boundary is
designed to be used as a planning tool for government agencies and the public. Like the
Study and Core Area boundaries, the PotNR boundary places no restriction on private
property use.
2

For general guidance about integrity issues and National Register properties, see National Park Service, How to Apply the National
Register Criteria for Evaluation (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, revised 1997). The survey evaluations described
above do not meet the more stringent integrity standards for National Historic Landmark designation. See National Park Service,
How to Prepare National Historic Landmark Nominations (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, 1999), 36- 37.
3
See 36 CFR 60.1- 14 for regulations about nominating a property to the National Register and 36 CFR 63 for regulations concerning
Determinations of Eligibility for inclusion in the National Register.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

7

The term integrity, as defined by the National Register of Historic Places, is “the ability of a
property to convey its significance.”4 While assessments of integrity are subjective,
battlefields can have integrity only if they can be positively located through research and
“ground-truthing,” and only if significant portions of the landscape’s historic terrain have
not been substantially disturbed. Other conditions contribute to the degree of integrity a
battlefield retains:
•

the quantity and quality of surviving battle-period resources (e.g.,
buildings, roads, fence lines, military structures, and archeological
features);

•

the quantity and quality of the spatial relationships between and among
those resources and the intervening terrain that connects them;

•

the extent to which current battlefield land use is similar to battle-period
land use; and

•

the extent to which a battlefield’s physical features and overall character
visually communicate an authentic sense of the sweep and setting of the
battle.

Natural changes in vegetation—woods growing out of historic farm fields, for example—
do not necessarily diminish the landscape’s integrity. Significant changes in land use since
the Civil War do affect integrity; the degree to which post-war development has altered
and fragmented the historic landscape and destroyed historic features is critical when
assessing integrity. Still, some post-battle development is expected; slight or moderate
change within the battlefield may not substantially diminish a battlefield’s integrity.
Often these post-battle “non-contributing” elements are included in the PotNR boundary
in accordance with National Register of Historic Places guidelines.
The Potential National Register boundaries therefore indicate which battlefields are likely
eligible for future listing in the National Register of Historic Places and likely deserving of
future preservation efforts. If a surveyor determined that a battlefield was entirely
compromised by land use incompatible with the preservation of historic features (i.e., it
has little or no integrity), it did not receive a PotNR boundary. In cases where a battlefield
was already listed in the National Register, surveyors reassessed the existing
documentation based on current scholarship and resource integrity, and, when
appropriate, provided new information and proposed new boundaries as part of the
surveys. As a result, some PotNR boundaries will contain lands already listed in the
National Register of Historic Places. In other cases, PotNR boundaries will exclude listed
lands that have lost integrity. (See Tables 5 and 6 for boundary comparisons for each
battlefield.)5
The data from which all three boundaries are drawn do not necessarily reflect the full
research needed for a formal National Register nomination. Potential National Register
4

National Park Service, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, 1992 (Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources Division), 10. Archeological integrity was not
examined during this study, but should be considered in future battlefield studies and formal nominations to the National Register.
5
The ABPP’s surveys and PotNR assessments do not constitute formal action on behalf of the office of the National Register of
Historic Places. PotNR assessments are intended for planning purposes only; they do not carry the authority to add, change, or
remove an official listing.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

8

boundaries are based on an assessment of aboveground historic features associated with
the cultural and natural landscape. The surveys did not include a professional
archeological inventory or assessment of subsurface features or indications. In some cases,
future archeological testing will help determine whether subsurface features remain,
whether subsurface battle features convey important information about a battle or
historic property, and whether that information may help to confirm, refine, or refute the
boundaries previously determined by historic studies and terrain analysis.
The ABPP survey information should be reassessed during future compliance processes
such as the Section 106 process required by the National Historic Preservation Act6 and
Environmental Impact Statements/Environmental Assessments required by the National
Environmental Policy Act.7 Likewise, more detailed research and assessments should take
place when any battlefield is formally nominated to the National Register or proposed for
designation as a National Historic Landmark. New research and intensive-level surveys of
these sites will enlighten future preservation and compliance work. Agencies should
continue to consult local and state experts for up-to-date information about these
battlefields.
While a 4-acre portion of Buffington Island has already been listed in the National
Register of Historic Places (see Table 3), the ABPP has identified a PotNR boundary within
the battlefield’s Study Area that could guide efforts to expand Buffington Island’s
existing National Register boundary. Based on the ABPP’s evaluation, more than half of
the total Study Area retains enough integrity to be included within the PotNR boundary.
At Salineville, no known effort has been undertaken to recognize the battlefield’s
historic significance by nominating it to the National Register of Historic Places. However,
the ABPP believes approximately half of the total Study Area has enough integrity to merit
listing.

Questionnaires
While the ABPP maintains data about its own program activities at Civil War battlefields,
most preservation work occurs at the local level. Therefore, to carry out the Congressional
directive for information about activities at the battlefields, the ABPP sought input from
local battlefield managers and advocacy organizations. The ABPP distributed
questionnaires designed to gather information about the types of preservation activities
that have taken place at the battlefields since 1993. The Questionnaire is reproduced in
Appendix B.
In Ohio, representatives from three organizations completed and returned the
questionnaires. Their responses, combined with the survey findings, allowed the ABPP to
create a profile of conditions and activities at Ohio’s two Civil War battlefields.

6
7

16 USC 470f.
42 USC 4331- 4332.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

9

Summary of Conditions of Ohio’s Civil War Battlefields
Quantified Land Areas
Using a Geographic Information System (GIS), the ABPP calculated the amount of land
historically associated with the battle (Study Area); the amount of land where forces were
engaged (Core Area); and the amount of land that may retain enough integrity to be
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places and that remains to be
protected (Potential National Register boundary).
As noted above and as Table 1 illustrates, the Study Areas and Core Areas of Buffington
Island and Salineville have been established in accordance with the ABPP research and
field survey methodology. Particular attention was paid to identifying the routes of
approach and withdrawal associated with each battle, and to identifying areas of
secondary action that influenced the course or outcome of the battles. The Study Area
and Core Area boundaries established for each battlefield take these movements and
actions into account, recognizing the extent to which theses ancillary areas facilitate
greater understanding of the battle story. Please see the individual battlefield profiles at
the end of this report for more information about the extent of and reasons for the
established boundaries.

Table 1. Battlefield Area Statistics
Battlefield

Boundary
Type

Established

Acres

Buffington Island (OH001)

Study Area
Core Area
PotNR

2009
2009
2009

14,130.43
1,235.82
11,071.99

Salineville (OH002)

Study Area
Core Area
PotNR

2009
2009
2009

8,424.44
956.12
3,485.67

Boundary figures reflect only those areas in Ohio. At Buffington Island, the Study Area, Core Area, and
PotNR boundaries include portions of the Ohio River that are owned by the state of West Virginia (see
Buffington Island’s Battlefield Profile for details).

Condition Assessments
Using field survey data, the ABPP assessed the overall condition of each battlefield’s Study
Area. While no battlefield remains completely unaltered since the Civil War, Buffington
Island has suffered little alteration within most of its landscape. While damage from
mining operations has occurred within the Core Area, most of the battlefield’s Study Area
retains its historic rural character. In the Study Area, most of the land is still used for
agricultural purposes and very little of the area has been developed for residential and
industrial use.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

10

Salineville has experienced moderate change to its terrain and aboveground battle
features during the past 150 years.8 During the time of battle, the area was rural. Today,
less than half of the area is used for agricultural purposes. Nearly one quarter of the
landscape has been transformed by coal strip mining, and a small portion of the battlefield
has been developed.

Table 2. Condition Summary
Condition

Battlefield

Land use is little changed (1)
Portions of landscape have been altered, but
most essential features remain (1)

Buffington Island (OH001)

Salineville (OH002)

Much of the landscape has been altered and
fragmented, leaving some essential features (0)

N/A

Landscape and terrain have been altered
beyond recognition (0)

N/A

Battlefields that were not assessed (0)

N/A

Registration
The nation’s official method for recognizing historic properties worthy of preservation is
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Registered battlefields meet
national standards for documentation, physical integrity, and demonstrable significance to
the history of our nation. Federal, state, and local agencies use information from the
National Register as a planning tool to identify and make decisions about cultural
resources. Federal and state laws, most notably Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, require agencies to account for the effects their projects (roads,
wetland permits, quarrying, cell towers, etc.) may have on listed and eligible historic
properties, such as battlefields. Listing allows project designers to quickly identify the
battlefield and avoid or minimize impacts to the landscape.
Properties listed on the National Register are also eligible for numerous federal and state
historic preservation grant programs. Recognition as a registered battlefield may also
advance public understanding of and appreciation for the battlefield, and may encourage
advocacy for its preservation.9
As Table 3 indicates, a tiny portion of Buffington Island is already listed in the NRHP.
This piece was registered in 1970, prior to the CWSAC’s study in the early 1990s. The listed
8

The condition of archeological resources within the battlefields was not assessed. Future studies are needed to determine the
degree of archeological integrity associated with subsurface battle deposits.
There are three levels of federal recognition for historic properties. Congressional designations, such as national park units,
National Historic Landmarks, and listings in the National Register of Historic Places. Congress creates national park units. The
Secretary of the Interior designates National Historic Landmarks (NHL) – nationally significant historic sites – for their exceptional
value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the heritage of the United States. The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is
the nation’s official list of cultural sites significant at the national, state, or local level and worthy of preservation. National park
units and NHLs are also treated as listed in the National Register.
9

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

11

portion of Buffington Island includes only 4.00 acres. The ABPP’s surveys indicate that
additional lands of more than 11,067.00 acres in Ohio may be eligible for NRHP listing.
Salineville is not currently listed in the NRHP, but the ABPP finds 3,480.00 acres of the
battlefield may be eligible for listing. Table 3 compares the number of acres already
designated or listed with the number of acres that are likely to meet the same criteria, but
may not currently be part of an existing NRHP, NHL, or NPS boundary.

Table 3: Acres Registered Compared with Acres Potentially
Eligible to be Registered
Battlefield

Designation

Buffington Island
(OH001)
Salineville (OH002)
All Battlefields

NR

PotNR
Acres

Existing
Registered
Acres

Total Acres
Unregistered
but Potentially
Eligible

11,071.99

4.00

11,067.99

3,485.67

0.00

3,485.67

14,557.66

4.00

14,553.66

Boundary figures reflect only those areas in Ohio. See the Individual Battlefield Profiles for information about the size of
battlefield lands that extend into West Virginia.

Stewardship
The majority of land associated with both Buffington Island and Salineville is held in
private, unprotected ownership. However, 11.74 acres of Buffington Island are owned
by the Ohio state government. A 4.00-acre site known as the “Buffington Island Memorial
State Park,” which is managed by the Ohio Historical Society, commemorates the battle
with a monument and offers visitors recreational space with facilities that include
restrooms, a picnic shelter, and parking. In addition to resources associated with the Civil
War battle at Buffington Island, there is a prehistoric Native American burial mound at
the site.10 A separate 7.74-acre portion of the battlefield, which is administered by the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, provides public access to the Ohio River for
recreational purposes.

Table 4. Protective Stewardship of Intact Battlefield Land
Battlefield
Buffington Island (OH001)
Salineville (OH002)
All Battlefields

Permanently
Protected Acres
11.74

ABPP
PotNR
Acres
11,071.99

Unprotected,
Intact Acres
Remaining

0.00

3,485.67

3,485.67

11.74

14,557.66

14,545.92

11,060.25

Boundary figures reflect only those areas in Ohio. At Buffington Island, the Study Area, Core Area, and PotNR boundaries
include portions of the Ohio River that are owned by the state of West Virginia (see Buffington Island’s Battlefield Profile
for details).

10
Gray & Pape, Inc., “Existing Conditions of the Battlefield and Environs,” Battle of Buffington Island Battlefield Preservation Plan, 10
August 2006, (29 May 2009). http://ohsweb.ohiohistory.org/places/se03/bpp.pdf
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

12

Public Access and Interpretation
In its questionnaire (see Appendix B), the ABPP asked battlefield stewards about the types
of public access and interpretation available at the battlefields. The ABPP did not collect
information about the purpose or intent of the interpretation and access, such as whether
development of wayside exhibit was for purely educational reasons, to promote heritage
tourism, or to boost local economic development.
The ABPP asked respondents to indicate the type of interpretation available at or about
the battlefield. The categories included brochures, driving tours, living history
demonstrations, maintained historic features or areas, walking tours and trails, wayside
exhibits, websites, and other specialized programs. The results indicate that, while there
has been no effort to provide public interpretation at Salineville, the Ohio Historical
Society’s management efforts at Buffington Island offer public interpretation and
educational opportunities with a monument and interpretive signage that describes the
battlefield’s history. Moreover, although there is no visitors’ center at Buffington Island,
there is an on-going effort to develop a museum for additional site interpretation at a
near-by community center north of the state memorial park.

Figure 4. Monument and recreational facilities at Buffington Island State Memorial Park, Meigs
County, Ohio. Photograph by Joseph E. Brent, 2005.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

13

Local Advocacy
Nonprofit organizations play important roles in protecting historic battlefields. They step
in to preserve historic sites when public funding and management for historic preservation
are absent. When public funding is available, nonprofits serve as vital partners in publicprivate preservation efforts, acting as conduits for public funds, raising critical private
matching funds, keeping history and preservation in the public eye, and working with
landowners to find ways to protect battlefield parcels.
Unfortunately, the Salineville battlefield does not have a nonprofit group to advocate
for preservation interests. At Buffington Island, however, the newly formed Buffington
Island Battlefield Preservation Foundation has begun to build relationships with
stakeholders at the state and local levels. The Buffington Island Battlefield Preservation
Foundation plans to work cooperatively with the Ohio Historical Society, and with the
support of the Meigs County Historical Society, to develop additional interpretive
resources and expand preservation efforts at Buffington Island.
While other organizations with more general historical interests may also play important
roles in battlefield preservation, the Buffington Island Battlefield Preservation Foundation
is the only known local organization in Ohio dedicated solely to the goals of battlefield
preservation, interpretation, and promotion.

Figure 3. Ocean Road, used by retreating Confederates during the battle of Salineville,
Columbiana County, Ohio. Photograph by Joseph E. Brent, 2005.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

14

Individual Battlefield Profiles

Battlefield Profile Glossary
Location

County or city in which the battlefield is located.

Campaign

Name of military campaign of which the battle was part. Campaign
names are taken from The War of the Rebellion: a Compilation of the
Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies.

Battle Date(s)

Day or days upon which the battle took place, as determined by the
Civil War Sites Advisory Commission.

Principal Commanders Ranking commanders of opposing forces during the battle.
Forces Engaged

Name or description of largest units engaged during the battle.

Results

Indicates battle victor or inconclusive outcome.

Study Area

Acres within the Study Area (see Table 2), as determined by the ABPP,
that represent the historic extent of the battle upon the landscape.

Potential National
Register Lands

Acres of land that retain historic character and may be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (see Table 2).

Protected Lands

Estimated acres (based on questionnaires and GIS) of battlefield land
set aside or placed under permanent easement since the Civil War for
the purposes of maintaining the historic character of the landscape
and for preventing future impairment or destruction of the landscape
and historic features.

Publicly Accessible
Lands

Estimated acres (based on responses to questionnaires) maintained
for public visitation.

Management Area

Name of historic site, park, or other area maintained for resource
protection and/or public visitation.

Friends Group(s)

Name of local advocacy organization(s) that support preservation
activities at/for the battlefield.

Preservation
Activities
Since 1993

Indicates which types of preservation activities have taken place at
the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses to questionnaires).

Public
Interpretation
Since 1993

Indicates which types of interpretation/educational activities have
taken place at the battlefield since 1993 (based on
responses to questionnaires).

Condition Statement The ABPP’s assessment of the overall condition of the battlefield’s
Study Area (based on field surveys and responses to questionnaires).
Historical Designation

Notes the most prestigious historical designation the
battlefield has received (i.e. national park unit, National Historic
Landmark, or National Register of Historic Places).

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

15

Buffington Island (OH001)
Location

Meigs County

Campaign

Morgan’s Raid in Kentucky, Indiana, and Ohio (July 1863)

Battle Date(s)

July 19, 1863

Principal Commanders

Brig. Gen. Edward H. Hobson [US];
Brig. Gen. John Hunt Morgan [CS]

Forces Engaged

Brigade, 3,000 [US]; Brigade, 1,700 [CS]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

19,725.64 acres (14,130.43 acres in Ohio; 5,595.21 acres in
West Virginia)
The Study Area encompasses the route taken by Morgan’s raiders as
they attempted to reach and cross the ford at Buffington Island, and
the multiple routes used by the Federal troops in pursuit. The Ohio
River itself has been included because a Federal naval flotilla under
the command of Lieutenant Commander LeRoy Fitch was patrolling
the river looking for Morgan and guarding the various crossing points,
including the ford at Buffington Island.

Potential National
Register Lands

12,826.28 acres (11,071.99 acres in Ohio; 1,754.28 acres in West
Virginia)

Protected Lands

11.74 acres
Ohio Department of Natural Resources – Division of Wildlife,
7.74 acres, fee simple
Ohio Historical Society, 4.00 acres, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

11.74 acres
Ohio Department of Natural Resources – Division of Wildlife,
Portland Access, 7.74 acres, fee simple
Ohio Historical Society, Buffington Island State Memorial Park,
4.00 acres

Management Area(s)

Buffington Island State Memorial Park
Portland Access

Friends Group(s)

Buffington Island Battlefield Preservation Foundation

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

16

Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
http://ohsweb.ohiohistory.org/places/se03/

Other
Monument

Condition Statement

Agricultural land use is little changed since the period of
significance with the exception of portions of the Core Area,
which have been destroyed by recent mining operations.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (1970)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

17

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

18

Salineville (OH002)
Location

Columbiana County

Campaign

Morgan’s Raid in Kentucky, Indiana, Ohio (July 1863)

Battle Date(s)

July 26, 1863

Principal Commanders

Brig. Gen. James Shackelford [US];
Brig. Gen. John Hunt Morgan [CS]

Forces Engaged

9th Michigan Cavalry, 2,600 [US]; Confederate Army, 800 [CS]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

8,424.44 acres
The Study Area reflects the roundabout route taken by Morgan’s
raiders as they attempted to find a safe crossing point along the Ohio
River and escape their Federal pursuers. Morgan, although
outnumbered, tried to cut his way through the Union troopers at
Monroeville and again west of Salineville. The approach route to the
southeast was added to include the movements of an additional
column of Federal cavalry – the troopers who finally forced Morgan’s
surrender in the two northern core areas.

Potential National
Register Lands

3,485.67 acres

Protected Lands

0.00 acres

Publicly Accessible Lands

0.00 acres

Management Area(s)

None

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
Other

Condition Statement

Strip mining and residential development on portions of the
battlefield have altered the landscape’s appearance, but essential

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

19

features, such as the ravine that offered concealment to
Confederate forces, retain their historic character.
Historical Designation

None

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

20

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

21

Appendices
Appendix A. Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002
Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December 2002
Amends the American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k)

An Act
To amend the American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior
to establish a battlefield acquisition grant program.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ``Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002''.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
(a) Findings.--Congress finds the following
(1) Civil War battlefields provide a means for the people of
the United States to understand a tragic period in the history
of the United States.
(2) According to the Report on the Nation's Civil War
Battlefields, prepared by the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission, and dated July 1993, of the 384 principal Civil War
battlefields-(A) almost 20 percent are lost or fragmented;
(B) 17 percent are in poor condition; and
(C) 60 percent have been lost or are in imminent
danger of being fragmented by development and lost as
coherent historic sites.
(b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-(1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect
nationally significant Civil War battlefields through
conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
(2) to create partnerships among State and local
governments, regional entities, and the private sector to
preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil War
battlefields.
SEC. 3. BATTLEFIELD ACQUISITION GRANT PROGRAM.
The American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k) is amended-(1) by redesignating subsection (d) as paragraph (3) of
subsection (c), and indenting appropriately;
(2) in paragraph (3) of subsection (c) (as redesignated by
paragraph (1))-(A) by striking ``Appropriations'' and inserting
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

22

``appropriations''; and
(B) by striking ``section'' and inserting
``subsection'';
(3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following
``(d) Battlefield Acquisition Grant Program.-``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection
``(A) Battlefield report.--The term `Battlefield
Report' means the document entitled `Report on the
Nation's Civil War Battlefields', prepared by the Civil
War Sites Advisory Commission, and dated July 1993.
``(B) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity'
means a State or local government.
``(C) Eligible site.--The term `eligible site' means
a site-``(i) that is not within the exterior
boundaries of a unit of the National Park System;
and
``(ii) that is identified in the Battlefield
Report.
``(D) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the
Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American
Battlefield Protection Program.
``(2) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a
battlefield acquisition grant program under which the Secretary
may provide grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share
of the cost of acquiring interests in eligible sites for the
preservation and protection of those eligible sites.
``(3) Nonprofit partners.--An eligible entity may acquire an
interest in an eligible site using a grant under this subsection
in partnership with a nonprofit organization.
``(4) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the total
cost of acquiring an interest in an eligible site under this
subsection shall be not less than 50 percent.
``(5) Limitation on land use.--An interest in an eligible
site acquired under this subsection shall be subject to section
6(f)(3) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16
U.S.C. 460l-8(f)(3)).
``(6) Reports.-``(A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the
date of the enactment of this subparagraph, the
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the
activities carried out under this subsection.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--Not later than
2 years after the date of the enactment of this
subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a
report that updates the Battlefield Report to reflect-``(i) preservation activities carried out at
the 384 battlefields during the period between
publication of the Battlefield Report and the
update;
``(ii) changes in the condition of the
battlefields during that period; and
``(iii) any other relevant developments
relating to the battlefields during that period.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

23

``(7) Authorization of appropriations.-``(A) In general.--There are authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary from the Land and Water
Conservation Fund to provide grants under this
subsection $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004
through 2008.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--There are
authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry
out paragraph (6)(B), $500,000.''; and
(4) in subsection (e)-(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``as of'' and all
that follows through the period and inserting ``on
September 30, 2008.''; and
(B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and provide
battlefield acquisition grants'' after ``studies''.

-end-

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

24

Appendix B. Battlefield Questionnaire
State
Battlefield
Person Completing Form
Date of completion

I. Protected Lands of the Battlefield (“Protected lands” are these “owned” for historic
preservation or conservation purposes. Please provide information on land protected since 1993.)
1) Identify protected lands by parcel since 1993. Then answer these questions about each parcel,
following example in the chart below. What is the acreage of each parcel? Is parcel owned fee
simple, by whom? Is there is an easement, if so name easement holder? Was the land purchased or
the easement conveyed after 1993? What was cost of purchase or easement? What was source of
funding and the amount that source contributed? Choose from these possible sources: Coin money,
LWCF, Farm Bill, State Government, Local Government, Private Owner, Private Non-Profit (provide
name), or Other (describe).
Parcel

Acres Owner

Easement Year

Cost

Source

Joe Smith Farm

194

Private

SHPO

1995

$500,000

LWCF/$250,000
Private/$250,000

Sue Jones Tract

16

Battlefield Friends, Inc. No

2002

$41,000

State/$20,000
BFI/$21,000

2) Other public or non-profit lands within the battlefield? (Y/N)
• If yes, describe
• Name of public or non-profit owner or easement holder
• Number of Acres owned/held

3) Is the information in a GIS? (Y/N)
If yes, may NPS obtain a copy of the data? (Y/N)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

25

II. Preservation Groups
1) Is there a formal interested entity (friends group, etc) associated with the battlefield? (Y/N)
If yes
Name
Address
Phone
Fax
E-mail
Web site? (Y/N)
• If yes, what is the URL?
• Does the web site have a preservation message? (Y/N)
• What year did the group form?
III. Public Access and Interpretation
1) Does the site have designated Public Access? (Y/N) (Count public roads if there are designated
interpretive signs or pull-offs)
If yes, what entity provides the public access (Access may occur on lands owned in fee or under
easement to the above entities)
Federal government
State government
Local government

Private Nonprofit organization
Private owner
Other

Name of entity (if applicable)
Number of Acres Accessible to the Public (size of the area in which the public may physically visit
without trespassing. Do not include viewsheds.)
2) Does the site have interpretation? (Y/N)
If yes, what type of interpretation is available?
Audio tour tapes
Visitor Center
Maintained historic features/areas
Brochure(s)
Living History
Wayside exhibits
Website
Driving Tour
Other
Walking Tour

IV. Registration
Applies only to the battlefield landscape, not to individual contributing features of a battlefield
(i.e., the individually listed Dunker Church property of .2 acres does not represent the Antietam
battlefield for the purposes of this exercise)
1) Is the site a designated National Historic Landmark? (Y/N)
If yes, NHL and ID Number
2) Is the site listed in the National Register? (Y/N)
If yes, NRHP Name and ID Number

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

26

3) Is the site listed in the State Register? (Y/N)
If yes, State Register Name and ID Number
4) Is the site in the State Inventory? (Y/N)
If yes, State Inventory Name and ID Number
5) Is the site designated as a local landmark or historic site? (Y/N)
Type of Designation/Listing

V. Program Activities
What types of preservation program activities have occurred at the battlefield? Provide
final product name and date if applicable (e.g., Phase I Archeological Survey Report on the
Piper Farm, 1994 and Antietam Preservation Plan, 2001, etc.)
1) Research and Documentation

2) Cultural Resource surveys and inventories (building/structure and landscape inventories,
archeological surveys, landscape surveys, etc.)

3) Planning Projects (preservation plans, site management plans, cultural landscape reports,
etc.)

4) Interpretation Projects (also includes education)

5) Advocacy (any project meant to engage the public in a way that would benefit the
preservation of the site, e.g. PR, lobbying, public outreach, petitioning for action, etc.)

6) Legislation (any local, state, or federal legislation designed to encourage preservation of
the battlefield individually or together with other similar sites)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

7) Fundraising
To support program activities?
To support land acquisition/easements?
8) Other

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

Appendix C. Civil War Battlefield Land Acquisition Grants
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (PL 107-359) amended the American
Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 USC 469k) to authorize a matching grant program to
assist States and local communities in acquiring significant Civil War battlefield lands for
permanent protection. Most recently, Congress showed its continued support for these
grants through its reauthorization of this program within the Omnibus Public Land
Management Act of 2009 (PL 111-11).
Eligible battlefields are those listed in the 1993 Report on the Nation’s Civil War
Battlefields prepared by the Congressionally chartered Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
(CWSAC). Eligible acquisition projects may be for fee interest in land or for a protective
interest such as a perpetual easement.
Since 1998, Congress has appropriated a total of $38.9 million for this Civil War Battlefield
Land Acquisition Grants (CWBLAG). These grants have assisted in the permanent
protection of more than 15,742 acres at 61 Civil War battlefields in 14 states. While there
have been no CWBLAG grants awarded in Ohio to date, more than 12,820.00 acres of
Buffington Island and 3,480.00 acres of Salineville may be eligible for land acquisition
funding from this program.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

Appendix D. American Battlefield Protection Program Planning Grants
Since 1992, the ABPP has offered annual planning grants to nonprofit organizations,
academic institutions, and local, regional, state, and tribal governments to help protect
battlefields located on American soil. Applicants are encouraged to work with partner
organizations and federal, State and local government agencies as early as possible to
integrate their efforts into a larger battle site protection strategy.
The ABPP has granted nearly $9.5 million to 379 projects throughout the country. Awards
have included $75,000.00 for projects associated with Ohio’s Civil War battlefields.
Grantee

Year

Project Title

Award

Heidelberg College

1999

Archeological Survey of Buffington Island

$40,000.00

Ohio Historical Society

2004

Buffington Island Battlefield
Preservation Plan

$35,000.00

Total ABPP Planning Grants to Ohio Battlefields as of FY2009

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - State of Ohio

$75,000.00

