U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
State of Florida
Washington, DC
March 2011

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
State of Florida
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program
Washington, DC
March 2011

Authority
The American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996, as amended by the Civil War
Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December
2002), directs the Secretary of the Interior to update the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields.

Acknowledgments
NPS Project Team Paul Hawke, Project Leader; Kathleen Madigan, Survey Coordinator;
Tanya Gossett, Paul Hawke, and January Ruck, Reporting; Matthew Borders, Historian;
Kristie Kendall, Program Assistant
Battlefield Surveyor(s) Kathleen Madigan and Matthew Borders, American Battlefield
Protection Program, National Park Service
Respondents Gail Bishop, Gulf Islands National Seashore; Bert Hickey, Natural Bridge
State Park; Rodney Kite-Powell, Tampa Bay History Center’s Saunders Foundation; John C.
Whitehurst, Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve
Acknowledgements Kevin Foster, National Maritime Heritage Program, National Park
Service

Cover: Ocean Pond is a significant feature associated with Olustee. Located on the edge of the
battlefield, the swamps surrounding the pond influenced the course of the battle. Photograph by
Mathew Borders, 2009.

Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .................................................................................................... 1
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 3
SYNOPSIS........................................................................................................................ 5
METHOD STATEMENT ..................................................................................................... 7
RESEARCH AND FIELD SURVEYS ...................................................................................................... 7
QUESTIONNAIRES ....................................................................................................................... 11
SUMMARY OF CONDITIONS OF FLORIDA’S CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELDS ...................... 12
QUANTIFIED LAND AREAS ........................................................................................................... 12
CONDITION ASSESSMENTS ........................................................................................................... 12
REGISTRATION ........................................................................................................................... 13
STEWARDSHIP ............................................................................................................................ 15
PUBLIC ACCESS AND INTERPRETATION........................................................................................... 17
ADVOCACY ............................................................................................................................... 18
INDIVIDUAL BATTLEFIELD PROFILES ........................................................................... 19
APPENDICES ................................................................................................................. 37
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B.
APPENDIX C.
APPENDIX D.

CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD LAND ACQUISITION GRANTS ................................................ 37
AMERICAN BATTLEFIELD PROTECTION PROGRAM PLANNING GRANTS .......................... 38
CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD PRESERVATION ACT OF 2002 ............................................... 39
BATTLEFIELD QUESTIONNAIRE ................................................................................. 42

Introduction
The information in this report fulfills, in part, the purposes of the Civil War Battlefield
Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016). Those purposes are:
1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect nationally significant Civil
War battlefields through conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
2) to create partnerships among state and local governments, regional entities, and
the private sector to preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil
War battlefields.
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 directs the Secretary of the Interior,
acting through the American Battlefield Protection Program (ABPP) of the National Park
Service, to update the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s
Civil War Battlefields. The CWSAC was established by Congress in 1991 and published its
report in 1993. Congress provided funding for this update in FY 2005 and FY 2007.
Congress asked that the updated report reflect the following:
•
•
•

Preservation activities carried out at the 384 battlefields identified by the CWSAC
during the period between 1993 and the update;
Changes in the condition of the battlefields during that period; and
Any other relevant developments relating to the battlefields during that period.

In accordance with the legislation, this report presents information about Civil War
battlefields in Florida for use by Congress, federal, state, and local government agencies,
landowners, and other interest groups. Other state reports will be issued as surveys and
analyses are completed.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

3

Figure 1. CWSAC battlefields in Florida.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

4

Synopsis
There are six Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC) battlefields in the State of
Florida – Fort Brooke, Natural Bridge, Olustee, Saint John’s Bluff, Santa Rosa
Island, and Tampa. Historically, these battlefields encompassed more than 25,500 acres.1
Today, approximately 14,600 acres, or 56 percent, retain sufficient significance and
integrity to make them worthy of preservation.2
In 1993, the CWSAC used a four-tiered system that combined historic significance, current
condition, and level of threat to determine priorities for preservation among the
battlefields. Table 1 indicates how the CWSAC prioritized Florida’s Civil War battlefields in
their study.

Table 1. CWSAC Preservation Priorities from 1993
CWSAC Priority
I Critical Need

Battlefield
N/A

County/City
N/A

II Comprehensive Preservation Possible

N/A

N/A

III Additional Protection Needed

Santa Rosa Island (FL001)
Natural Bridge (FL006)
Olustee (FL005)

Escambia
Leon
Baker

IV Fragmented/Destroyed

Tampa (FL002)
Fort Brooke(FL004)
Saint John’s Bluff (FL003)

City of Tampa
City of Tampa
Duval

Currently, two of the battlefields identified as Priority III landscapes in 1993 retain a high
degree of integrity. While no battlefield remains completely unaltered since the Civil War,
Natural Bridge and Olustee have experienced relatively little change to their terrain and
aboveground battle features in nearly 150 years. (see Table 3).3
In 2009, the American Battlefield Protection Program (ABPP) survey found that Natural
Bridge retains 100 percent of its integrity. The State of Florida owns 62 acres of the
battlefield which it maintains as the Natural Bridge Battlefield State Historic Site. An
additional 4 acres is protected as part of the Northwest Florida Water Management
District’s Gerrell Conservation Easement. The remainder of the landscape, 2,234 acres or
97 percent of the battlefield is in private, unprotected ownership.
The USDA Forest Service and the State of Florida own 691 acres of land at the Olustee
battlefield which are maintained as the Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park. An
additional 306 acres at the USDA Forest Service’s Olustee Experimental Forest are managed
specifically for conservation purposes and are considered protected. The remainder of the
landscape that retains integrity, 4,530 acres or 81 percent of the battlefield, is either
privately owned or is owned by the Federal government for uses other than those
compatible with the goals of historic landscape preservation.

1

Using GIS software the ABPP calculated that the Study Areas for the 6 battlefields in Florida represent 25,978.43 acres
Using GIS software the ABPP calculated that the Potential National Register Boundaries for the 6 battlefields in Florida represent
14,688.51 acres.
3
The condition of archeological resources within the battlefields was not assessed. Future studies are needed to determine the
degree of archeological integrity associated with subsurface battle deposits.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida
5
2

Santa Rosa Island, the third battlefield identified as a Priority III landscape in 1993, has
experienced moderate change to its landscape since the time of battle. The island has lost
land due to erosion; however, the portion of the island that remains retains integrity as a
battlefield landscape. Fort Pickens, the primary objective of the Confederate attack on the
island, still stands and is maintained as an historic resource. The fort and island are
managed by the National Park Service as part of Gulf Islands National Seashore.
While the CWSAC originally determined that Saint John’s Bluff did not retain sufficient
integrity to merit preservation, the ABPP’s resurvey of the site has shown that more than
59 percent of the battlefield retains integrity. More than 80 percent of that area is the
Saint John’s River. The land area that retains integrity is managed by the National Park
Service as part of the Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve and is considered
protected.
Tampa and Fort Brook have suffered the greatest degree of modern intrusion. In 1993,
the CWSAC determined that these battlefields were substantially fragmented. Both
battlefields are in an urban setting and have undergone considerable change since the
Civil War. There is no protected battlefield land at either of these sites and the ABPP did
not identify any additional portions of landscape that retain historic integrity. Today, only
commemorative and interpretive opportunities, rather than land preservation, are
appropriate actions at these two battlefields.
See the Individual Battlefield Profiles for detailed condition assessments and preservation
recommendations. The National Park Service will issue updated priorities after all CWSAC
battlefields nationwide have been surveyed and all state reports have been completed.
Figure 2: View of the
beach and water
approach where
Confederate troops
landed at Santa Rosa
Island before moving
on to attack Fort
Pickens. The primary
threat to the land
portion of the
battlefield is erosion
caused by natural
forces in Pensacola Bay.
Photograph by
Matthew Borders,
2009.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

6

Method Statement
Congress instructed the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American Battlefield
Protection Program (ABPP), to report on changes in the condition of the battlefields since
1993 and on “preservation activities” and “other relevant developments” carried out at
each battlefield since 1993. To fulfill those assignments, the ABPP 1) conducted a site
survey of each battlefield, and 2) prepared and sent out questionnaires to battlefield
managers and advocacy organizations (see Appendix D).
The 1993 significance rankings for each battlefield stand. Significance was assigned by the
Civil War Sites Advisory Commission and the ABPP sustains the CWSAC’s opinions as to the
relevant importance of each battle within the larger context of the war.

Research and Field Surveys
The ABPP conducted the field assessments of Florida battlefields in September 2009. The
surveys entailed additional historical research, on-the-ground documentation and
assessment of site conditions, identification of impending threats to each site, and site
mapping. Surveyors used a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver to map historic
features of each battlefield and used a Geographic Information System (GIS) program to
draw site boundaries. The ABPP retains all final survey materials. Each battlefield survey
file includes a survey form (field notes, list of defining features, list of documentary
sources, and a photo log), photographs, spatial coordinates of significant features, and
boundaries described on USGS topographic maps. The surveys did not include
archeological investigations for reasons of time and expense.
Study Areas and Core Areas
With the exception of Olustee, the CWSAC established a Study Area and a Core Area for
each of Florida’s principal battlefields in 1993 (see Figure 3 for definitions). The CWSAC
boundaries have proven invaluable as guides to local land and resource preservation
efforts at Civil War battlefields. Since 1993 however, the National Park Service has refined
its battlefield survey methodology, which include research, working with site stewards,
identifying and documenting lines of approach and withdrawal used by opposing forces,
and applying the concepts of military terrain analysis to all battlefield landscapes. The
ABPP’s Battlefield Survey Manual explains the field methods employed during this study.4
The surveys also incorporate the concepts recommended in the National Register of
Historic Places’ Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, which was published in 1992 after the CWSAC completed its original
assessments of the battlefields.5
Using its refined methodology, the ABPP was able to validate or adjust the CWSAC’s Study
Area and Core Area boundaries to reflect more accurately the full nature and original
resources of these battlefields (see Table 2). At many of Florida’s surveyed battlefields, the
refined methodology resulted in significant increases to the sizes of the Study Area and
Core Area. In particular, the original CWSAC surveys did not consistently include routes of
approach and withdrawal or secondary actions that influenced the course or outcome of
the battle. The revised boundaries take these movements and actions into account.6 It is
4

American Battlefield Protection Program, “Battlefield Survey Manual,” (Washington, DC: National Park Service, revised 2007).
National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, 1992 , Revised
1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources Division).
6
National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields
(http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf), offers recommendations regarding “Selecting Defensible
Boundaries.” While this document indicates that “generally, boundaries should not be drawn to include the portion of the route
taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters,” the guidelines also state that “a basic principle is to include within the
boundary all of the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took actions based on their assumption
of being in the presence of the enemy.” The ABPP interprets this latter guidance to mean all military activities that influenced the
battle. See the individual battlefield profiles for information about military actions taken along the routes included. In accordance
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida
7
5

important to note however, that the Study
Area and Core Area boundaries are simply
historical boundaries that describe where the
battle took place; neither indicates the current
integrity of the battlefield landscape, so
neither can be used on its own to identify
surviving portions of battlefield land that may
merit protection and preservation.
Potential National Register Boundaries
To address the question of what part of the
battlefield remains reasonably intact and
warrants preservation, this study introduced a
third boundary line that was not attempted by
the CWSAC: the Potential National Register
boundary (see Figure 3).
Looking at each Study Area, the surveyors
assigned PotNR boundaries where they judged
that the landscape retained enough integrity
to convey the significance of the historic
battle. In a few cases, the PotNR boundary
encompasses the entire Study Area. In most
cases, however, the PotNR boundary includes
less land than identified in the full Study Area.
Because many battlefields are entirely in
private ownership and physical access to large
portions of the battlefields is limited to public
right of ways, the ABPP reviewed publicly
available satellite images of the battlefield
Study Areas in order to confirm or supplement
surveyors’ field observations about land use
and landform integrity.7
In assigning PotNR boundaries, the ABPP
followed National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) guidelines when identifying and
mapping areas that retain integrity and
cohesion within the Study Areas.8 Because the
ABPP focuses only on areas of battle however,
the Program did not evaluate lands adjacent
to the Study Area that may contribute to a
broader historical and chronological definition
of “cultural landscape.” Lands outside of the

Figure 3: Boundary Definitions
The Study Area represents the historic
extent of the battle as it unfolded across the
landscape. The Study Area contains resources
known to relate to or contribute to the battle
event: where troops maneuvered and
deployed, immediately before, during, and
after combat, and where they fought during
combat. Historic accounts, terrain analysis,
and feature identification inform the
delineation of the Study Area boundary. The
Study Area indicates the extent to which
historic and archeological resources
associated with the battle (areas of combat,
command, communications, logistics, medical
services, etc.) may be found. Surveyors
delineated Study Area boundaries for every
battle site that was positively identified
through research and field survey, regardless
of its present integrity.
The Core Area represents the areas of
fighting on the battlefield. Positions that
delivered or received fire, and the intervening
space and terrain between them, fall within
the Core Area. Frequently described as
“hallowed ground,” land within the Core
Area is often the first to be targeted for
protection. There may be more than one
Core Area on a battlefield, but all lie within
the Study Area.
Unlike the Study and Core Areas, which are
based only upon the interpretation of historic
events, the Potential National Register
(PotNR) boundary represents ABPP’s
assessment of a Study Area’s current integrity
(the surviving landscape and features that
convey the site’s historic sense of place). The
PotNR boundary may include all or some of
the Study Area, and all or some of the Core
Area. Lands within PotNR boundaries should
be considered worthy of further attention,
although future evaluations may reveal more
or less integrity than indicated by the ABPP
surveys.

with the methodology of this study, if routes included in the Study Area retain integrity, they are included within the Potential
National Register boundary for the battlefield landscape.
7
The ABPP primarily used satellite images from the World Wide Web mapping services Bing, Google, and Yahoo. The date range
for the sattelite images was 2007-2010. The level of detail in the sattelite images available from each mapping service depended
upon the service’s coverage of a specified area; image resolutions were generally highly detailed in urban and suburban areas and
less detailed in rural areas.
8
For general guidance about integrity issues and National Register of Historic Places properties, see National Park Service, How to
Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, revised 1997). The survey
evaluations described above do not meet the more stringent integrity standards for National Historic Landmark designation. See
National Park Service, How to Prepare National Historic Landmark Nominations (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior,
1999), 36-37.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida
8

Study Area associated with other historic events and cultural practices may need to be
evaluated in preparation for a formal nomination of the cultural landscape.
Most importantly, the PotNR boundary does not constitute a formal determination of
eligibility by the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places.9 The PotNR
boundary is designed to be used as a planning tool for government agencies and the
public. Like the Study and Core Area boundaries, the PotNR boundary places no restriction
on private property use.
The term integrity, as defined by the NRHP, is “the ability of a property to convey its
significance.”10 While assessments of integrity are traditionally based on seven specific
attributes – location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association –
battlefields are unique cultural resources and require special evaluation.“ Generally, the
most important aspects of integrity for battlefields are location, setting, feeling and
association,” and the most basic test for determining the integrity of any battlefield is to
assess “whether a participant in the battle would recognize the property as it exists
today.”11
Other conditions contribute to the degree of integrity a battlefield retains:
•

the quantity and quality of surviving battle-period resources (e.g.,
buildings, roads, fence lines, military structures, and archeological
features);

•

the quantity and quality of the spatial relationships between and among
those historic resources and the landscape that connects them;

•

the extent to which current battlefield land use is similar to battle-period
land use; and

•

the extent to which a battlefield’s physical features and overall character
visually communicate an authentic sense of the sweep and setting of the
battle.

The degree to which post-war development has altered and fragmented the historic
landscape or destroyed historic features and viewsheds is critical when assessing integrity.
Changes in traditional land use over time do not generally diminish a battlefield’s
integrity. For example, landscapes that were farmland during the Civil War do not need to
be in agricultural use today to be considered eligible for listing in the NRHP so long as the
land retains its historic rural character. Similarly, natural changes in vegetation – woods
growing out of historic farm fields, for example – do not necessarily lessen the landscape’s
integrity.
Some post-battle development is expected; slight or moderate change within the
battlefield may not substantially diminish a battlefield’s integrity. A limited degree of
9

See 36 CFR 60.1- 14 for regulations about nominating a property to the National Register of Historic Places and 36 CFR 63 for
regulations concerning Determinations of Eligibility for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
10
National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992 , Revised 1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources
Division), http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf. Archeological integrity was not examined during this
study, but should be considered in future battlefield studies and formal nominations to the National Register.
11
National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992 , Revised 1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources
Division).
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

9

residential, commercial, or industrial development is acceptable. These post-battle “noncontributing” elements are often included in the PotNR boundary in accordance with
NRHP guidelines.12
Significant changes in land use since the Civil War do diminish the integrity of the
battlefield landscape. Heavy residential, commercial, and industrial development; cellular
tower and wind turbine installation; and large highway construction are common
examples of such changes. Battlefield landscapes with these types of changes are
generally considered as having little or no integrity.
The PotNR boundaries therefore indicate which battlefields are likely eligible for future
listing in the NRHP and likely deserving of future preservation efforts.13 If a surveyor
determined that a battlefield was entirely compromised by land use incompatible with the
preservation of historic features (i.e., it has little or no integrity), the ABPP did not assign a
PotNR boundary.14
In cases where a battlefield is already listed in the NRHP, surveyors reassessed the existing
documentation based on current scholarship and resource integrity, and, when
appropriate, provided new information and proposed new boundaries as part of the
surveys. As a result, some PotNR boundaries will contain or share a boundary with lands
already listed in the NRHP. In other cases, PotNR boundaries will exclude listed lands that
have lost integrity (see Table 4.)15
The data from which all three boundaries are drawn do not necessarily reflect the full
research needed for a formal NRHP nomination. PotNR boundaries are based on an
assessment of aboveground historic features associated with the cultural and natural
landscape. The surveys did not include a professional archeological inventory or
assessment of subsurface features or indications. In some cases, future archeological
testing will help determine whether subsurface features remain, whether subsurface battle
features convey important information about a battle or historic property, and whether
that information may help to confirm, refine, or refute the boundaries previously
determined by historic studies and terrain analysis.
The ABPP survey information should be reassessed during future compliance processes
such as the Section 106 process required by the National Historic Preservation Act 16 and
Environmental Impact Statements/Environmental Assessments required by the National
Environmental Policy Act.17 Likewise, more detailed research and assessments should take
place when any battlefield is formally nominated to the NRHP or proposed for designation
12

The ABPP looks only at the battle-related elements of a cultural landscape. Post-battle elements, while not contributing to the
significance of the battlefield, may be eligible for separate listing in the National Register of Historic Places on their own merits.
13
Future nominations of battlefield land may take the form of districts (most common), or individual sites within a multiple property
context (appropriate for battlefields with far-flung resources). The ABPP’s survey boundaries do not imply any one approach; they
serve only as a starting point for discussions between the nominating agent and the State Historic Preservation Officer.
14
National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992 , Revised 1999 (http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf), offers recommendations
regarding "Selecting Defensible Boundaries." While this document indicates that "generally, boundaries should not be drawn to
include the portion of the route taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters," the Guidelines also state that "a basic
principle is to include within the boundary all of the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took
actions based on their assumption of being in the presence of the enemy." The ABPP interprets this latter guidance to mean all
military activities that influenced the battle. See the individual battlefield profiles for information about military actions taken along
the routes included. In accordance with the methodology of this study, if routes included in the Study Area retain integrity, they are
included within the Potential National Register boundary for the battlefield landscape.
15
The ABPP’s surveys and PotNR assessments do not constitute formal action on behalf of the office of the National Register of
Historic Places. PotNR assessments are intended for planning purposes only; they do not carry the authority to add, change, or
remove an official listing.
16
16 USC 470f.
17
42 USC 4331-4332.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida
10

as a National Historic Landmark (NHL). New research and intensive-level surveys of these
sites will enlighten future preservation and compliance work. Agencies should continue to
consult local and state experts for up-to-date information about these battlefields.
The ABPP has identified approximately 13,800 acres associated with four battlefields in
Florida eligible for listing in the NRHP. Portions of all four of these battlefields are already
listed in the NRHP; however, the existing documentation does not express accurately the
size or current integrity of these four battlefields. The ABPP believes that the two sites
listed as battlefield landscapes should be reevaluated and the two sites listed for their
historic resources should be considered for listing as battlefield landscapes.

Questionnaires
While the ABPP maintains data about its own program activities at Civil War battlefields,
most preservation work occurs at the local level. Therefore, to answer Congress's directive
for information about battlefield preservation activities, the ABPP sought input from local
battlefield managers and advocacy organizations. The ABPP distributed questionnaires
designed to gather information about the types of preservation activities that have taken
place at the battlefields since 1993. The Questionnaire is reproduced in Appendix B.
In Florida, representatives of five organizations completed and returned questionnaires.
Their responses, combined with the survey findings, allowed the ABPP to create a profile
of conditions and activities at Florida’s Civil War battlefields.

Figure 4: The entrance sign at Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park. Both the State of Florida and the USDA
Forest Service protect battlefield land at Olustee. Photograph by Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park, 2010.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

11

Summary of Conditions of Florida’s Civil War Battlefields
Quantified Land Areas
Using Geographic Information Systems software, the ABPP calculated the amount of land
historically associated with the battle (Study Area), the amount of land where forces were
engaged (Core Area), and the amount of land that may retain enough integrity to be
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and that remains to be
protected (Potential National Register boundary).
As noted above and as Table 2 illustrates, the Study Areas and Core Areas of Florida’s
battlefields have been revised in many cases. In particular, the original CWSAC surveys did
not consistently include routes of approach and withdrawal or secondary actions that
influenced the course or outcome of the battle. The revised boundaries take these
movements and actions into account.18 In some instances, new or additional research has
sharpened historical understanding of battle events. Therefore, the ABPP determined that
additional lands belong appropriately in the Study and Core Areas because they lend
additional understanding to the battle story. The individual battlefield profiles at the end
of this report provide additional information about the extent of and reasons for any
revisions to the CWSAC Study Area and Core Area boundaries.

Table 2. Battlefield Area Statistics
Battlefield

Study Area

Core Area

PotNR Boundary

Fort Brooke (FL004)

5,478.90

1,478.65

0.00

Natural Bridge (FL006)

2,301.80

344.42

2,301.80

Olustee (FL005)

5,919.08

1,108.49

5,528.58

Saint John’s Bluff (FL003)

7,163.85

1,069.43

4,245.34

Santa Rosa Island (FL001)

2,826.01

330.05

2,612.79

Tampa (FL002)

2,288.79

1,199.82

0.00

Condition Assessments
Using field survey data, the ABPP assessed the overall condition of each battlefield’s Study
Area. While no battlefield remains completely unaltered since the Civil War, four of
Florida’s battlefields have retained character defining features over the past 150 years.19
The landscape at Natural Bridge is in good condition with very little change since the
time of battle. The greatest threat to the landscape is development to the north and west
of the battlefield due to its proximity to Tallahassee and Woodville. The Wakulla
Correctional Institution also poses a potential threat to the Confederate approach route
from Newport (Old Plank Road.) If the State expands the facility to the east it could
impact the viewshed along the route. The Natural Bridge Historical Society, Inc., in
18

National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields
(http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf), offers recommendations regarding “Selecting Defensible
Boundaries.” While this document indicates that “generally, boundaries should not be drawn to include the portion of the route
taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters,” the guidelines also state that “a basic principle is to include within the
boundary all of the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took actions based on their assumption
of being in the presence of the enemy.” The ABPP interprets this latter guidance to mean all military activities that influenced the
battle. See the individual battlefield profiles for information about military actions taken along the routes included. In accordance
with the methodology of this study, if routes included in the Study Area retain integrity, they are included within the Potential
National Register boundary for the battlefield landscape.
19
The condition of archeological resources within the battlefields was not assessed. Future studies are needed to determine the
degree of archeological integrity associated with subsurface battle deposits.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

12

cooperation with the State of Florida, is actively working to preserve the Natural Bridge
battlefield both within and beyond the boundaries of the Natural Bridge Battlefield
Historic State Park. Reevaluation of the NRHP documentation and nomination of the
entire battlefield landscape to the NRHP would be appropriate next steps in the
preservation of this battlefield.
Olustee also remains in good condition. The USDA Forest Service owns 51 percent of the
battlefield, 22 percent of which is protected as part of the Olustee Battlefield Historic State
Park. The remaining battlefield lands are owned by timber companies, private individuals,
Baker County, and the State of Florida. The primary long-term threat to the battlefield is
logging, which can alter terrain features and disturb or destroy archeological evidence of
the battle. Reevaluation of the NRHP documentation, nomination of the entire battlefield
landscape to the NRHP, and development of plans to minimize damage to battlefield
terrain and archeological resources during forestry operations would be appropriate
preservation actions at Olustee.
Saint John’s Bluff and Santa Rosa Island have been altered to varying degrees since
the Civil War. The Study Areas of both battlefields retain integrity; however, the majority
of those areas are water. The land portions of these two battlefields are protected by the
National Park Service. The primary long term threat to both battlefields is erosion due to
natural forces in Pensacola Bay and the Saint John’s River.
Tampa and Fort Brooke have lost integrity as historic landscapes. The post-Civil War
growth of the city of Tampa has destroyed both battlefields. Although commemorative
and public interpretation opportunities exist and are appropriate, there is no opportunity
for meaningful landscape preservation.

Table 3: Battlefield Condition Summary
Condition

Battlefield

Land use is little changed (1)

Natural Bridge, Olustee

Portions of landscape have been altered, but
most essential features remain (2)

Santa Rosa Island

Much of the landscape has been altered and
fragmented, leaving some essential features (1)

Saint John’s Bluff

Landscape and terrain have been altered
beyond recognition (2)

Fort Brooke, Tampa

Battlefields that were not assessed (0)

None

Registration
The nation’s official method for recognizing historic properties worthy of preservation is
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Sites and structures listed in the
NRHP meet national standards for documentation, physical integrity, and demonstrable
significance to the history of our nation. Federal, state, and local agencies use information
from the NRHP as a planning tool to identify and make decisions about cultural resources.
Federal and state laws, most notably Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act
of 1966, require agencies to account for the effects their projects (roads, wetland permits,
quarrying, cell towers, etc.) may have on listed and eligible historic properties, such as
battlefields. Listing allows project designers to quickly identify the battlefield and avoid or
minimize impacts to the landscape.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

13

Properties listed in the NRHP may also be eligible for federal and state historic
preservation grant programs. Recognition as an NRHP listed battlefield can advance public
understanding of and appreciation for the battlefield, and may encourage advocacy for its
preservation.20
Florida currently has two Civil War battlefields listed in the NRHP as battlefield
landscapes—Natural Bridge and Olustee. While Natural Bridge has more than 2,300
acres within its PotNR, only 36 acres are listed in the NRHP. At Olustee, slightly more than
5 acres are listed in the NRHP, which accounts for less than one percent of the battlefield
landscape that retains integrity. The NRHP documentation for both battlefields should be
reevaluated and expanded to include the historic landscapes in there entirety.
Although Santa Rosa Island and Saint John’s Bluff are not listed in the NRHP as
battlefield landscapes, individual defining features associated with the battles are listed
seperately. Fully 92 percent of Santa Rosa Island’s and 59 percent of Saint John’s Bluff’s
Study Areas retain integrity and merit nomination to the NRHP as battlefield landscapes.
Because large portions of both Study Areas are water, future nominations will need to
recognize the roles of both Pensacola Bay and the St. John’s River as contributing features
to the battlefields.
At Tampa and Fort Brooks, the ABPP believes the Study Areas of these battlefields no
longer retain enough integrity to merit listing in the NRHP as battlefield landscapes.
Overall the ABPP has identified approximately 13,800 additional acres associated with
battlefield landscapes in Florida eligible for listing in the NRHP. The ABPP believes that all
four battlefields should be reevaluated. The existing documentation for Natural Bridge
and Olustee does not express accurately their size or current integrity. In addition, the
ABPP believes there is enough integrity at Santa Rosa Island and Saint John’s Bluff to
make each potentially eligible for individual listing as a battlefield landscape. (For a
comparison of the listed land and the ABPP’s recommended boundaries, see the maps in
the Individual Battlefield Profiles.)

Table 4. Acres Registered Compared with Acres Potentially
Eligible to be Registered
ABPP PotNR
Acres

Existing
Registered
Acres

Acres Potentially
Eligible to be
Registered

2,612.79

622.81

1,989.98

0.00

0.00

0.00

NRHP*

4,245.34

141.21

4,104.13

0.00

0.00

0.00

Olustee (FL005)

NRHP

5,528.58

5.18

5,523.40

Natural Bridge (FL006)

NRHP

2,301.80

36.36

2,265.44

Battlefield
Santa Rosa Island(FL001)

Designation
NRHP*

Tampa (FL002)
Saint John’s Bluff (FL003)
Fort Brooke (FL004)

*The NRHP designation is for an individual resources associated with the battle and not for the
battlefield landscape.
20

There are three levels of federal recognition for historic properties: Congressional designations such as national park units,
National Historic Landmarks, and listings in the National Register of Historic Places. Congress creates national park units. The
Secretary of the Interior designates National Historic Landmarks (NHL) – nationally significant historic sites – for their exceptional
value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the heritage of the United States. The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is
the nation’s official list of cultural sites significant at the national, state, or local level and worthy of preservation. Historic units of
the National Park System and NHLs are also listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida
14

Stewardship
For the purposes of this update, “protected land” means battlefield land that is in public
or private non-profit ownership, or is under permanent protective easement, and is
managed specifically for 1) the purposes of maintaining the historic character of the
landscape and for preventing future impairment or destruction of the landscape and
historic features, or for 2) a conservation purpose and use compatible with the goals of
historic landscape preservation.
The ABPP established this definition because, while public ownership of land often
provides some level of protection for historic resources, it does not necessarily foreclose
the potential for damage. Federal, state, and municipal ownership may prevent private
development, and public ownership may require compliance with state and federal
environmental laws, but the primary uses (military readiness, timber production,
recreation, mineral extraction, impoundment, etc.) of that public land may not be
compatible with the perpetual protection and appropriate management of a battlefield
landscape.
Of the more than 14,600 acres of Civil War battlefield lands that survive in Florida, only 25
percent are protected. The majority of the land is held by two Federal agencies. The
National Park Service owns and manages approximately 4,000 acres at Saint John’s Bluff
and Santa Rosa Island. At Olustee, the USDA Forest Service preserves 688 acres within
the boundaries of the Osceola National Forest as a battlefield landscape. Although owned
by the Federal government, the land is managed by the State of Florida as part of the
Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park. In addition, 306 acres at Olustee are protected
within the USDA Forest Service’s Olustee Experimental Forest.
Until recently, the State of Florida protected only 11 acres of historic battlefield land at
two battlefields – Natural Bridge and Olustee. In 2009 the State, working with the
Natural Bridge Historical Society, Inc. and the Civil War Preservation Trust, acquired 55
acres of land within the Core Area of the Natural Bridge battlefield. In addition, the
Northwest Florida Water Management District holds the Gerrell Conservation Easement, 4
acres of which are within the Natural Bridge Study Area. While not designated for its
historic value, this land has been set aside for conservation purposes and uses compatible
with the goals of historic landscape preservation. Today, Florida protects 70 acres of Civil
War battlefield land.
Florida has one of the largest state land acquisition programs in the United States, Florida
Forever. The program has protected more than 2.4 million acres since 1990.21 In 2009,
Florida Forever funding supported the purchase of 55 acres of battlefield land at Natural
Bridge (as noted above), which was added to the Natural Bridge Battlefield Historic State
Park. Currently, more than 1,500 acres of battlefield land at Natural Bridge and Olustee
are within the boundaries of four Florida Forever projects.22 While the land in these project
areas has been identified for future acquisition for environmental conservation, Florida
Forever’s conservation goals and land use policies are considered compatible with the
goals of historic landscape preservation.

21

In the early 1990’s the Florida state legislature enacted Preservation 2000, a ten-year program designed to acquire and conserve
lands for environmental, historical, and recreational purposes. The program was followed in 2000 by Florida Forever which
continues Preservation 2000’s acquisition and conservation goals.
22
The four projects are: Florida’s First Magnitude Springs, Raiford to Osceola Greenway, St. Joe Timberland, and Upper St. Mark’s
River Corridor.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

15

For each battlefield, Table 5 compares the amount of land permanently protected against
the total amount of land that has integrity but remains unprotected.23 This information
may serve planners and preservation advocates as a tool for prioritizing future
preservation initiatives.

Table 5. Protective Stewardship of Intact Battlefield Land*
Battlefield
Santa Rosa Island (FL001)

Permanently
Protected Acres

Fort Brooke (FL004)
Olustee (FL005)
Natural Bridge (FL006)

Unprotected, Intact
Acres Remaining

2,612.79

2,612.79

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3,071.53

4,245.34

1,173.81

0.00
998.07
67.62

0.00
5,528.58
2,301.80

0.00
4,530.51
2,234.18

Tampa (FL002)
Saint John’s Bluff (FL003)

ABPP PotNR
Acres

* For details, see each site's Individual Battlefield Profile

Figure 5: View of a portion of the Saint John’s Bluff Core Area in the St. John’s River, from Fort Caroline
National Memorial. The river is the primary defining feature at Saint John’s Bluff. Photograph by Kathleen
Madigan, 2009.
23

The ABPP culled information about permanently protected lands from questionnaire respondents and numerous partner
organizations. The data is not necessarily complete but provides an approximate idea of the amount of land protected at each
battlefield as of 2011.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

16

Public Access and Interpretation
In its questionnaire (see Appendix D), the ABPP asked battlefield stewards about the types of
public access and interpretation available at the battlefields. The ABPP did not collect
information about the purpose or intent of the interpretation and access, such as whether
development of wayside exhibit was for purely educational reasons, to promote heritage
tourism, or to boost local economic development.
The ABPP asked respondents to indicate the type of interpretation available at or about
the battlefield. The categories included brochures, driving tours, living history
demonstrations, maintained historic features or areas, walking tours and trails, wayside
exhibits, websites, and other specialized programs. The results, summarized in the
Individual Battlefield Profiles, indicate that three of Florida’s six Civil War battlefields offer
public access and facilities specifically dedicated to the interpretation of the battlefield
landscape and one that offers some level of interpretation pertaining to the battle.

Table 6: Interpretation Summary
On-site Interpretation

Battlefield

Battlefields with public interpretation,
including visitors center (1)

Natural Bridge (FL006), Olustee
(FL005), Santa Rosa Island (FL001)

Battlefields with public interpretation, but no
visitors center (3)

Saint John’s Bluff (FL003)

Battlefields with no public interpretation (0)

Fort Brooke (FL004), Tampa (FL002)

Figure 6:
Interpretive panel
ot Olustee. Land
at Olustee
Battlefield Historic
State Park is owned
primarily by the
USDA Forest
Service; however,
the site is managed
and interpreted by
the State of Florida.
Photograph by
Olustee Battlefield
Historic State Park,
2010.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

17

Advocacy
Nonprofit organizations play important roles in protecting historic battlefields. They step in
to preserve historic sites when public funding and management for historic preservation are
absent. When public funding is available, nonprofits serve as vital partners in public-private
preservation efforts, acting as conduits for public funds, raising critical private matching
funds, keeping history and preservation in the public eye, and working with landowners to
find ways to protect battlefield parcels.
Two of Florida’s six Civil War battlefields have active nonprofit advocates – Natural
Bridge and Olustee. The Natural Bridge Historical Society, Inc. (NBHS) promotes the
historical and cultural aspects of the battlefield and works to preserve lands associated
with the battle of Natural Bridge. In 2009 the society helped to acquire 55 acres of land
within the battlefield’s Core Area for inclusion in Natural Bridge Battlefield Historic State
Park. In addition, the NBHS has recently begun partnering with the John G. Riley
Center/Museum for African American History & Culture to promote local Civil War history.
At Olustee the Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park Citizens Support Organization
provides support to the state park and advocates for the battlefield in the local
community.
While other organizations with more general historical interests may also play important
roles in preserving South Florida’s battlefields, these two groups are the only known local
organizations in Florida that have been dedicated solely to the goals of battlefield
preservation, interpretation, and promotion of these resources.

Figure 7: Part of the Rakestraw property at Natural Bridge. The property was acquired in 2009 and added to
the Natural Bridge Battlefield Historic State Park. Photograph by Natural Bridge Historical Society, Inc., 2009.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

18

Individual Battlefield Profiles
Battlefield Profile Glossary
Location

County or city in which the battlefield is located.

Campaign

Name of military campaign of which the battle was part. Campaign
names are taken from The War of the Rebellion: a Compilation of
the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies.

Battle Date(s)

Day or days upon which the battle took place, as determined by the
Civil War Sites Advisory Commission.

Principal Commanders Ranking commanders of opposing forces during the battle.
Forces Engaged
Results

Name or description of largest units engaged during the battle.
Indicates battle victor or inconclusive outcome.

Study Area

Acreage determined by the ABPP to represent the full extent of land
associated with the historic battle.

Potential National
Register Lands

Acreage of land that retains historic character and may be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (see Table 2).

Protected Lands

Estimated acreage (based on questionnaires and GIS) of battlefield
land that is in public or private non-profit ownership, or is under
permanent protective easement, and is managed specifically for 1)
the purposes of maintaining the historic character of the landscape
and for preventing future impairment or destruction of the landscape
and historic features, or for 2) a conservation purpose and use
compatible with the goals of historic landscape preservation.

Publicly Accessible
Lands

Estimated acreage (based on responses to questionnaires)
within the Study Area maintained for public visitation.

Management Area

Name of historic site, park, or other area maintained for battlefield
resource protection and/or public visitation.

Friends Group(s)

Name of local advocacy organization(s) that support preservation
activities at/for the battlefield.

Preservation
Activities
Since 1993

Indicates which types of preservation activities have taken place at
the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses to questionnaires).

Public
Interpretation
Since 1993

Indicates which types of interpretation/educational activities have
taken place at the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses
to questionnaires).

Condition Statement The ABPP’s assessment of the overall condition of the battlefield’s
Study Area (based on field surveys and responses to questionnaires).
Historical Designation

Notes the most prestigious federal historical designation the
battlefield has received (i.e. national park unit, National Historic
Landmark, or National Register of Historic Places).

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

19

Fort Brooke (FL004)
Location

City of Tampa

Campaign

Expedition to Hillsborough River (1863)

Battle Date(s)

October 16 - 18, 1863

Principal Commanders

Lieutenant Commander A. A. Semmes, Acting Master Thomas R.
Harris [US]; Captain John Wescott [CS]

Forces Engaged

USS Tahoma and the USS Adela; Navy landing party [US]; Company
A, 2nd Florida Infantry Battalion, Florida Volunteers [CS]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

5,478.90 acres
The ABPP redrew the 1993 Study Area to more closely follow the
coastline around Hillsborough Bay and historic Tampa. The Study Area
was also reduced around the portion of the Hillsborough River that
was targeted by the U.S. Navy landing party. The primary Core Areas
were redrawn to more accurately reflect the fields of fire and ranges
of the artillery guns used by the U.S. Navy. The Core Area on the
Hillsborough River was reduced to more accurately reflect the location
where the Confederate blockade runner Scottish Chief and the sloop
Kate Dale were burned.

Potential National
Register Land

0.00 acres

Protected Land

0.00 acres

Publicly Accessible Land

0.00 acres

Management Area

None

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
Other

Condition Statement

Fort Brook has lost integrity as an historic landscape. The growth
of the city of Tampa has destroyed any evidence of the Civil War

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

20

battlefield. Although there is no opportunity for meaningful
landscape preservation, commemorative and interpretive
opportunities are possible and appropriate
Historical Designation

None

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

21

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

22

Natural Bridge (FL006)
Location

Leon County; Wakulla County

Campaign

Operations near Saint Marks, Florida (1865)

Battle Date(s)

March 6, 1865

Principal Commanders

Major General John Newton [US]; Brigadier General William Miller [CS]

Forces Engaged

2nd and 99th United States Colored Troops, battalion of the 2nd Florida
U.S. Cavalry, two U.S. Navy boat howitzers [US]; Kilcrease’s Artillery,
Dunham’s Battery, Abell's Battery, 5th Florida Cavalry, 1st Florida Militia,
Barwick’s Company Reserves, Hodges’ Company Reserves, Company A Milton Light Artillery, Companies A, B, and F - Florida Reserves [CS]

Results

Confederate victory

Study Area

2,301.80 acres
The 1993 Study Area was expanded to include the Confederate
approach routes up the Plank Road from Newport and along the
Natural Bridge Road to the west. The Federal approach route from the
approximate location of Tompkins Mill was also added to the Study
Area. The 1993 Core Area remains unchanged.

Potential National
Register Land

2,301.80 acres

Protected Land

67.62 acres
State of Florida, 62.81 acres, fee simple
Northwest Florida Water Management District, 4.81 acres, easement

Publicly Accessible Land

62.81 acres
State of Florida, Natural Bridge Battlefield State Historic Site

Management Area

Natural Bridge Battlefield State Historic Site

Friends Group(s)

Natural Bridge Historical Society, Inc.

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
http://www.floridastateparks.org/naturalbridge/
http://www.nbhscso.com

Other
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

23

Condition Statement

The landscape at Natural Bridge is in good condition with very
little change since the time of battle. The greatest threat to the
landscape is development to the north and west of the battlefield
due to its proximity to Tallahassee and Woodville. The Wakulla
Correctional Institution also poses a potential threat to the
Confederate approach route from Newport (Old Plank Road.) If
the State expands the facility to the east it could impact the
viewshed along the route. Reevaluation of the NRHP
documentation and nomination of the entire battlefield landscape
to the NRHP would be appropriate next steps in the preservation
of Natural Bridge.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Natural Bridge Battlefield, 1970)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

24

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

25

Olustee (FL005)
Location

Baker County

Campaign

Florida Expedition (1864)

Battle Date(s)

February 20, 1864

Principal Commanders

Brigadier General Truman Seymour [US]; Brigadier General Joseph
Finegan, Brigadier General Alfred H. Colquitt [CS]

Forces Engaged

District of Florida [US]; District of East Florida [CS]

Results

Confederate victory

Study Area

5,919.08 acres
The CWSAC did not delinate a Study Area or a Core Area in 1993. The
new Study Area includes the Federal approaches from Sanderson to
the east on the Lake City/Jacksonville Road and the Florida, Atlantic
and Gulf Railroad. The western edge of the Study Area extends around
the Confederate works defending Olustee Station, the point from
which the Confederate forces advanced. The new Core Area was
drawn to reflect the nature of the terrain. The fighting took place in a
pine barren bordered on all sides by marshes, swamps, ponds, and
creeks, limiting the scope of the battle.

Potential National
Register Land

5,528.58 acres

Protected Land

998.07 acres
USDA Forest Service, Osceola National Forest, 688 acres, fee simple
USDA Forest Service, Olustee Experimental Forest, 306.98 acres,
fee simple
State of Florida, Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park, 3.09 acres, fee
simple

Publicly Accessible Land

2,737.97 acres
USDA Forest Service, Osceola National Forest, 2,734.88 acres
State of Florida, Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park, 3.09 acres

Management Area

Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park

Friends Group(s)

Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park Citizens Support Organization

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

26

Website
http://www.floridastateparks.org/olusteebattlefield/
http://battleofolustee.org/

Other
Condition Statement

Olustee remains in good condition with very little change since
the time of battle. The USDA Forest Service owns 51 percent of
the battlefield, 22 percent of which is protected as part of the
Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park. The remaining battlefield
lands are owned by timber companies, private individuals, Baker
County, and the State of Florida. The primary long-term threat to
the battlefield is logging, which can alter terrain features and
disturb or destroy archeological evidence of the battle.
Reevaluation of the NRHP documentation, nomination of the
entire battlefield landscape to the NRHP, and development of
plans to minimize damage to battlefield terrain and archeological
resources during forestry operations would be appropriate
preservation actions at Olustee.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Olustee Battlefield, 1970)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

27

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

28

Saint John’s Bluff (FL003)
Location

Duval County

Campaign

Expedition to Saint John’s Bluff (1862)

Battle Date(s)

October 1 - 3, 1862

Principal Commanders

Brigadier General John M. Brannan and Commander Charles
Steedman [US]; Lieutenant Colonel Charles F. Hopkins [CS]

Forces Engaged

Saint John's River Expedition, Saint John's River Flotilla, South
Atlantic Blockading Squadron [US]; Saint John's Bluff Garrison [CS]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

7,163.85 acres
The 1993 Study Area was expanded to include the historic shoreline of the
Saint John's River from its mouth on the Atlantic Ocean to historic
Jacksonville. The Study Area was also extended down Mount Pleasant Creek
south of Saint John's Bluff to include the Federal landings at Buccaneer
Point and Mayport. The Core Area was extended from Saint John's Bluff
down to Fanning Island to accommodate the range of the artillery involved
in the duel between the U.S. Navy and Confederate artillery batteries.

Potential National
Register Land

4,245.34 acres

Protected Land

3,071.53
National Park Service, Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve, fee
simple

Publicly Accessible Land

3,071.53 acres
National Park Service, Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve,
2,930.32 acres
National Park Service, Fort Caroline National Memorial, 141.21 acres
(unit of Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve)

Management Area

Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

29

Other
Condition Statement

Much of Saint John’s Bluff has been altered since the time of
battle, but some essential features remain. A portion of the Study
Area retains integrity; however, a majority of it is water. The land
portion of the battlefield is protected by the National Park Service
as part of the Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve. The
primary long term threat to the land is erosion due to natural
forces in the Saint John’s River. Nomination of the entire
battlefield landscape to the NRHP would be the most appropriate
preservation action at Saint John’s Bluff. Because a large
portion of the area that retains integrity is water, any nomination
will need to recognize the role of the St. John’s River as a
contributing feature to the battlefield.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Fort Caroline, 1966)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

30

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

31

Santa Rosa Island (FL001)
Location

Escambia County

Campaign

Operations of the Gulf Blockading Squadron (1861)

Battle Date(s)

October 9, 1861

Principal Commanders

Colonel Harvey Brown [US]; Brigadier General Richard H. Anderson [CS]

Forces Engaged

Fort Pickens Garrison [US]; Santa Rosa Island Expedition [CS]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

2,826.01 acres
Based on historic coastal navigation maps, the 1993 Study Area was
redrawn to more closely follow the historic shoreline of Santa Rosa
Island. The Confederate transports’ approach route from both the
Navy Yard and the City of Pensacola were also added to the Study
Area. The 1993 Core Area was reduced to more closely match the
historic extent of Santa Rosa Island.

Potential National
Register Land

2,612.79 acres

Protected Land

2,546.60 acres
National Park Service, Gulf Islands National Seashore, 1024.66 acres
fee simple
State of Florida, Pensacola Bay, 1521.94 acres

Publicly Accessible Land

1,024.66 acres
National Park Service, Fort Pickens (Gulf Islands National
Seashore)

Management Area

Gulf Islands National Seashore

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
http://www.nps.gov/guis/planyourvisit/fort-pickens.htm

Other

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

32

Condition Statement

Portions of Santa Rosa Island have been altered, but most
essential features remain. The land portion of the battlefield is
protected by the National Park Service as part of the Gulf Islands
National Seashore. The primary threat to the land is erosion due
to natural forces in Pensacola Bay. In addition, the effects of
weather and climate on Fort Pickens pose a threat to the masonry
fortification. Nomination of the entire battlefield landscape to
the NRHP would be the most appropriate preservation action at
Santa Rosa Island. Because a large portion of the area that
retains integrity is water, any nomination will need to recognize
the role of Pensacola Bay as a contributing feature to the
battlefield.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Fort Pickens 1972)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

33

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

34

Tampa (FL002)
Location

City of Tampa

Campaign

Operations against Tampa (1862)

Battle Date(s)

June 30 - July 1, 1862

Principal Commanders

Lieutenant A.J. Drake [US]; Captain John W. Pearson [CS]

Forces Engaged

One Federal gunboat [US]; Osceola Rangers [CS]

Results

Confederate victory

Study Area

2,288.79 acres
The 1993 Study Area was expanded to include the full extent of the
Federal gunboat operations and the movements of the Osceola
Rangers during the battle. No Core Area was delineated in 1993. The
ABPP drew a new Core Area which represents the field of fire of the
Confederate artillery against the Federal gunboat.

Potential National
Register Land

0.00 acres

Protected Land

0.00 acres

Publicly Accessible Land

0.00 acres

Management Area

None

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
Other

Condition Statement

Tampa has lost integrity as an historic landscape. The growth of
the city of Tampa has destroyed any evidence of the Civil War
battlefield. Although there is no opportunity for meaningful
landscape preservation, commemorative and interpretive
opportunities are possible and appropriate

Historical Designation

None

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

35

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

36

Appendices
Appendix A. Civil War Battlefield Land Acquisition Grants
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (PL 107-359) amended the American
Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 USC 469k) to authorize a matching grant program to
assist States and local communities in acquiring significant Civil War battlefield lands for
permanent protection. Most recently, Congress showed its continued support for these grants
through its reauthorization of this program within the Omnibus Public Land Management Act
of 2009 (PL 111-11).
Eligible battlefields are those listed in the 1993 Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
prepared by the Congressionally-chartered Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC).
Eligible acquisition projects may be for fee interest in land or for a protective interest such as a
perpetual easement.
Since 1998, Congress has appropriated a total of $38.9 million for this Civil War Battlefield
Land Acquisition Grants (CWBLAG) Program. These grants have assisted in the permanent
protection of more than 16,600 acres at 67 Civil War battlefields in 14 states. To date, no
Florida battlefields have received funding from this source. Given the success of battlefield
land and easement acquisition in other states, CWBLAG funding can help protect historic
lands at Natural Bridge and Olustee battlefields in the future. While other battlefields
listed in this update are eligible for CWBLAG funding, applications to protect land that
retains integrity (within PotNR boundaries) will be the most competitive.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

37

Appendix B. American Battlefield Protection Program Planning Grants
Since 1992, the ABPP has offered annual planning grants to nonprofit organizations,
academic institutions, and local, regional, state, and tribal governments to help protect
battlefields located on American soil. The ABPP encourages applicants to work with
partner organizations and government agencies in order to integrate their efforts into a
comprehensive landscape protection strategy. To date, Florida’s Civil War battlefields have
not received any American Battlefield Protection Program Planning Grants.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

38

Appendix C. Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002
Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December 2002
Amends the American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k)

An Act
To amend the American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior
to establish a battlefield acquisition grant program.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ``Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002''.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
(a) Findings.--Congress finds the following
(1) Civil War battlefields provide a means for the people of
the United States to understand a tragic period in the history
of the United States.
(2) According to the Report on the Nation's Civil War
Battlefields, prepared by the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission, and dated July 1993, of the 384 principal Civil War
battlefields-(A) almost 20 percent are lost or fragmented;
(B) 17 percent are in poor condition; and
(C) 60 percent have been lost or are in imminent
danger of being fragmented by development and lost as
coherent historic sites.
(b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-(1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect
nationally significant Civil War battlefields through
conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
(2) to create partnerships among State and local
governments, regional entities, and the private sector to
preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil War
battlefields.
SEC. 3. BATTLEFIELD ACQUISITION GRANT PROGRAM.
The American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k) is amended-(1) by redesignating subsection (d) as paragraph (3) of
subsection (c), and indenting appropriately;
(2) in paragraph (3) of subsection (c) (as redesignated by
paragraph (1))-(A) by striking ``Appropriations'' and inserting
``appropriations''; and
(B) by striking ``section'' and inserting
``subsection'';
(3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

39

``(d) Battlefield Acquisition Grant Program.-``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection
``(A) Battlefield report.--The term `Battlefield
Report' means the document entitled `Report on the
Nation's Civil War Battlefields', prepared by the Civil
War Sites Advisory Commission, and dated July 1993.
``(B) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity'
means a State or local government.
``(C) Eligible site.--The term `eligible site' means
a site-``(i) that is not within the exterior
boundaries of a unit of the National Park System;
and
``(ii) that is identified in the Battlefield
Report.
``(D) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the
Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American
Battlefield Protection Program.
``(2) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a
battlefield acquisition grant program under which the Secretary
may provide grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share
of the cost of acquiring interests in eligible sites for the
preservation and protection of those eligible sites.
``(3) Nonprofit partners.--An eligible entity may acquire an
interest in an eligible site using a grant under this subsection
in partnership with a nonprofit organization.
``(4) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the total
cost of acquiring an interest in an eligible site under this
subsection shall be not less than 50 percent.
``(5) Limitation on land use.--An interest in an eligible
site acquired under this subsection shall be subject to section
6(f)(3) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16
U.S.C. 460l-8(f)(3)).
``(6) Reports.-``(A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the
date of the enactment of this subparagraph, the
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the
activities carried out under this subsection.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--Not later than
2 years after the date of the enactment of this
subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a
report that updates the Battlefield Report to reflect-``(i) preservation activities carried out at
the 384 battlefields during the period between
publication of the Battlefield Report and the
update;
``(ii) changes in the condition of the
battlefields during that period; and
``(iii) any other relevant developments
relating to the battlefields during that period.
``(7) Authorization of appropriations.-``(A) In general.--There are authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary from the Land and Water
Conservation Fund to provide grants under this
subsection $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004
through 2008.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--There are
authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

40

out paragraph (6)(B), $500,000.''; and
(4) in subsection (e)-(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``as of'' and all
that follows through the period and inserting ``on
September 30, 2008.''; and
(B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and provide
battlefield acquisition grants'' after ``studies''.

-end-

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

41

Appendix D. Battlefield Questionnaire
State
Battlefield
Person Completing Form
Date of completion

I. Protected Lands of the Battlefield (“Protected lands” are these “owned” for historic
preservation or conservation purposes. Please provide information on land protected since
1993.)
1) Identify protected lands by parcel since 1993. Then answer these questions about each
parcel, following example in the chart below. What is the acreage of each parcel? Is
parcel owned fee simple, by whom? Is there is an easement, if so name easement holder?
Was the land purchased or the easement conveyed after 1993? What was cost of purchase
or easement? What was source of funding and the amount that source contributed?
Choose from these possible sources: Coin money, LWCF, Farm Bill, State Government, Local
Government, Private Owner, Private Non-Profit (provide name), or Other (describe).
Parcel

Acres Owner

Easement Year Cost

Joe Smith Farm 194

Private

Sue Jones Tract
State/$20,000

Battlefield Friends, Inc.

16

SHPO

1995

No

Source

$500,000

LWCF/$250,000
Private/$250,000

2002

$41,000
BFI/$21,000

2) Other public or non-profit lands within the battlefield? (Y/N)
•

If yes, describe

•

Name of public or non-profit owner or easement holder

•

Number of Acres owned/held

3) Is the information in a GIS? (Y/N)
If yes, may NPS obtain a copy of the data? (Y/N)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

42

II. Preservation Groups
1) Is there a formal interested entity (friends group, etc) associated with the battlefield?
(Y/N)
If yes
Name
Address
Phone
Fax
E-mail
Web site? (Y/N)
•
•
•

If yes, what is the URL?
Does the web site have a preservation message? (Y/N)
What year did the group form?

III. Public Access and Interpretation
1) Does the site have designated Public Access? (Y/N) (Count public roads if there are
designated interpretive signs or pull-offs)
If yes, what entity provides the public access (Access may occur on lands owned in fee
or under easement to the above entities)
Federal government
State government
Local government

Private Nonprofit organization
Private owner
Other

Name of entity (if applicable)
Number of Acres Accessible to the Public (size of the area in which the public may
physically visit without trespassing. Do not include viewsheds.)

2) Does the site have interpretation? (Y/N)
If yes, what type of interpretation is available?
Visitor Center
Brochure(s)
Wayside exhibits
Driving Tour
Walking Tour

Audio tour tapes
Maintained historic features/areas
Living History
Website
Other

IV. Registration
Applies only to the battlefield landscape, not to individual contributing features of a
battlefield (i.e., the individually listed Dunker Church property of .2 acres does not
represent the Antietam battlefield for the purposes of this exercise)
1) Is the site a designated National Historic Landmark? (Y/N)
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – State of Florida

43

If yes, NHL and ID Number
2) Is the site listed in the National Register? (Y/N)
If yes, NRHP Name and ID Number
3) Is the site listed in the State Register? (Y/N)
If yes, State Register Name and ID Number
4) Is the site in the State Inventory? (Y/N)
If yes, State Inventory Name and ID Number
5) Is the site designated as a local landmark or historic site? (Y/N)
Type of Designation/Listing

V. Program Activities
What types of preservation program activities have occurred at the battlefield? Provide
final product name and date if applicable (e.g., Phase I Archeological Survey Report on the
Piper Farm, 1994 and Antietam Preservation Plan, 2001, etc.)
1) Research and Documentation

2) Cultural Resource surveys and inventories (building/structure and landscape inventories,
archeological surveys, landscape surveys, etc.)

3) Planning Projects (preservation plans, site management plans, cultural landscape
reports, etc.)

4) Interpretation Projects (also includes education)

5) Advocacy (any project meant to engage the public in a way that would benefit the
preservation of the site, e.g. PR, lobbying, public outreach, petitioning for action, etc.)

6) Legislation (any local, state, or federal legislation designed to encourage preservation of
the battlefield individually or together with other similar sites)

7) Fundraising
To support program activities?
To support land acquisition/easements?
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Florida

44

8) Other

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Florida

45


