U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
District of Columbia
Washington, DC
October 2009

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
District of Columbia
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program
Washington, DC
September 2009

Authority
The American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996, as amended by the Civil War
Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December
2002), directs the Secretary of the Interior to update the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields.

Acknowledgments
NPS Project Team Paul Hawke, Project Leader; Kathleen Madigan, Survey Coordinator;
Tanya Gossett and January Ruck, Reporting; Shannon Davis, Preservation Specialist;
Matthew Borders, Historian; Renee S. Novak and Gweneth Langdon, Interns.
Battlefield Surveyor(s) Lisa Rupple, American Battlefield Protection Program
Respondents Adrienne Applewhaite-Coleman, Superintendent, and Simone Moffett,
Cultural Resources Specialist, National Park Service – Rock Creek Park; and Ruth Trocolli,
City Archeologist, District of Columbia Historic Preservation Office.

Cover: In 1937, the Civilian Conservation Corps reconstructed Fort Stevens. Today, it is
owned and managed by the National Park Service. Photograph by Elizabeth Ries, 2009.

Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ......................................................................................... 1
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... 3
SYNOPSIS ............................................................................................................ 4
METHOD STATEMENT ......................................................................................... 5
RESEARCH AND FIELD SURVEY ........................................................................................... 5
QUESTIONNAIRE .............................................................................................................. 8
SUMMARY OF CONDITIONS OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA’S CIVIL WAR
BATTLEFIELD ..................................................................................................... 10
QUANTIFIED LAND AREAS ............................................................................................... 10
CONDITION ASSESSMENT ................................................................................................ 10
REGISTRATION............................................................................................................... 12
STEWARDSHIP ............................................................................................................... 13
PUBLIC ACCESS AND INTERPRETATION ............................................................................... 13
LOCAL ADVOCACY ........................................................................................................ 14
INDIVIDUAL BATTLEFIELD PROFILE .................................................................. 15
APPENDICES ...................................................................................................... 19
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B.
APPENDIX C.
APPENDIX D.

CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD PRESERVATION ACT OF 2002 .................................... 19
BATTLEFIELD QUESTIONNAIRE ...................................................................... 22
CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD LAND ACQUISITION GRANTS ...................................... 25
AMERICAN BATTLEFIELD PROTECTION PROGRAM PLANNING GRANTS ................ 26

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

2

Introduction
The information in this report fulfills, in part, the purposes of the Civil War Battlefield
Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016). Those purposes are:
1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect nationally significant Civil
War battlefields through conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
2) to create partnerships among state and local governments, regional entities, and
the private sector to preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil
War battlefields.
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 directs the Secretary of the Interior,
acting through the American Battlefield Protection Program of the National Park Service,
to update the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil
War Battlefields. The CWSAC was established by Congress in 1991 and published its report
in 1993. Congress provided funding for this update in FY2005 and FY2007. Congress
asked that the updated report reflect the following:
•
•
•

Preservation activities carried out at the 384 battlefields identified by the
CWSAC during the period between 1993 and the update;
Changes in the condition of the battlefields during that period; and
Any other relevant developments relating to the battlefields during that period.

In accordance with the legislation, this report presents information about the one CWSAC
battlefield in the District of Columbia for use by Congress, federal, state, and local
government agencies, landowners, and other interest groups. Other state reports will be
issued as surveys and analyses are completed.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

3

Synopsis
In 1993, the CWSAC report identified the District of Columbia’s Fort Stevens battlefield as
a site that could offer little more than opportunity for commemoration. During the Civil
War, most of the battlefield landscape was rural. Today, most of the terrain has been
altered beyond recognition by urban development.
In 2005, ABPP surveyors revisited Fort Stevens and estimated that more than half of the
battlefield landscape, or Study Area, had been lost to urbanization. In the battlefield Core
Area, nearly all of the historic landscape has been destroyed. What little remains of the
Fort Stevens battlefield is protected within the boundaries of the Rock Creek Park. The
park includes several geographically discontiguous sites associated with the Fort Circle
Parks (also known as the Civil War defenses of Washington). Within the battlefield Study
Area, four of the Circle Fort Parks – Fort Stevens, Fort Totten, Fort DeRussy, Fort Bayard –
retain integrity. Battlefield terrain at the other two sites – Fort Slocum and Fort Reno – is
not intact. Apart from the Circle Fort Park sites and landscape protected by the National
Park Service along the Rock Creek Valley, no other historic battlefield land has survived the
growth of Washington, DC.
The National Park Service continues its research, interpretation, and preservation activities
at those sites within the Fort Stevens battlefield in its care. However, given the current
condition of the battlefield landscape as a whole, areas outside national park land offer
no battlefield terrain preservation opportunities.
The CWSAC prioritized Fort Stevens as a Priority IV Fragmented/Destroyed battlefield in
1993. The American Battlefield Protection Program will issue updated priorities after all of
the CWSAC battlefields nationwide have been surveyed and all state reports have been
completed.

Figure 1. Fort Stevens, CWSAC Battlefield in the District of Columbia.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

4

Method Statement
Congress instructed the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American Battlefield
Protection Program (ABPP), to report on changes in the condition of the battlefields since
1993 and on “preservation activities” and “other relevant developments” carried out at
each battlefield since 1993. To fulfill those assignments, the ABPP 1) conducted site
surveys of each battlefield and 2) prepared and sent out questionnaires to battlefield
managers and advocacy organizations (see Appendix B).

Research and Field Survey
The ABPP conducted the field assessment of the District of Columbia’s battlefield in April
2006. The survey entailed additional historical research, on-the-ground documentation
and assessment of site conditions, identification of impending threats to each site, and site
mapping. Surveyors used a Global Positioning System (GPS) to map historic features of the
battlefield and used a Geographic Information System (GIS) to draw site boundaries. The
ABPP retains all final survey materials. The battlefield survey file includes a survey form
(field notes, list of defining features, list of documentary sources, and a photo log),
photographs, spatial coordinates of significant features, and boundaries described on
USGS topographic maps. The ABPP survey did not include archeological investigations for
reasons of time and expense. However, this report does reflect the findings of a four-year
archeological study completed for the National Park Service at Rock Creek Park in 2008.1
Study Areas and Core Areas
The CWSAC identified a Study Area and a Core Area for each principal battlefield (see
Figure 2). The CWSAC boundaries have proven invaluable as guides to local land and
resource preservation efforts at Civil War battlefields. However, since 1993, the National
Park Service has refined its battlefield survey techniques, which include research, working
with site stewards, identifying and documenting lines of approach and withdrawal used by
opposing forces, and applying the concepts of military terrain analysis to all battlefield
landscapes. The ABPP’s Battlefield Survey Manual explains the field methods employed
during this study.2 The surveys also incorporate the concepts recommended in the
National Register of Historic Places’ Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering
America’s Historic Battlefields, which was published in 1992 after the CWSAC completed its
original assessments of the battlefields.
Using its refined methodology, ABPP was able to validate or adjust the CWSAC’s Study
Area and Core Area boundaries to reflect more accurately the full nature and original
resources of these battlefields (see Table 2). At Fort Stevens, the refined methodology
resulted in significant increases to the size of the Study Area and Core Area. However, it is
important to note that the Study Area and Core Area boundaries are simply historical
boundaries that describe where the battle took place; neither indicates the current
integrity of the battlefield landscape, so neither can be used on its own to identify
surviving portions of battlefield land that may merit protection and preservation.

1

S. Piedel, J. Bedell, C. LeeDecker, J. Shellenhamer, E. Griffitts, “Bold Rocky, and Picturesque, Archeological Overview and
Assessment and Archeological Identification and Evaluation Study of Rock Creek Park,” (Washington, DC: The Louis Berger
Group, Inc., 2008)
2
American Battlefield Protection Program, “Battlefield Survey Manual,” (Washington, DC: National Park Service, revised 2007),
http://www.nps.gov/history/abpp/battlefieldsurveymanual.pdf, October 2008.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

5

Potential National Register Boundaries
To address the question of what part of
the battlefield remains reasonably intact
and warrants preservation, this study
introduced a third boundary line that was
not attempted by the CWSAC: the
Potential National Register boundary (see
Figure 2).
Looking at each Study Area, the surveyors
assigned PotNR boundaries where they
judged that enough battlefield land
remained to convey the significance of the
engagement. In a few cases, the PotNR
boundary encompasses the entire Study
Area. In most cases, however, the PotNR
boundary includes less land than identified
in the full Study Area.
In assigning PotNR boundaries, the ABPP
followed National Register of Historic
Places guidelines when identifying and
mapping areas that retain integrity and
cohesion within the Study Areas.3
However, because the ABPP focuses only
on areas of battle, the ABPP did not
evaluate lands adjacent to the Study Area
that may contribute to a broader historical
and chronological definition of “cultural
landscape.” Lands outside of the Study
Area associated with other historic events
and cultural practices may need to be
evaluated in preparation for a formal
nomination of the cultural landscape.
Most importantly, the PotNR boundary
does not constitute a formal
determination of eligibility by the
Keeper of the National Register of
Historic Places.4 The PotNR boundary is
designed to be used as a planning tool for
government agencies and the public. Like
the Study and Core Area boundaries, the
PotNR boundary places no restriction on
private property use.

Figure 2: Boundary Definitions
The Study Area represents the historic extent
of the battle as it unfolded across the
landscape. The Study Area contains resources
known to relate to or contribute to the battle
event: where troops maneuvered and
deployed, immediately before and after
combat, and where they fought during
combat. Historic accounts, terrain analysis,
and feature identification inform the
delineation of the Study Area boundary. The
Study Area indicates the extent to which
historic and archeological resources associated
with the battle (areas of combat, command,
communications, logistics, medical services,
etc.) may be found and protected. Surveyors
delineated Study Area boundaries for every
battle site that was positively identified
through research and field survey, regardless
of its present integrity.
The Core Area represents the areas of
fighting on the battlefield. Positions that
delivered or received fire, and the intervening
space and terrain between them, fall within
the Core Area. Frequently described as
“hallowed ground,” land within the Core
Area is often the first to be targeted for
protection. The Core Area lies within the
Study Area.
Unlike the Study and Core Areas, which are
based only upon the interpretation of historic
events, the Potential National Register
(PotNR) boundary represents ABPP’s
assessment of a Study Area’s current integrity
(the surviving landscape and features that
convey the site’s historic sense of place). The
PotNR boundary may include all or some of
the Study Area, and all or some of the Core
Area. Lands within PotNR boundaries should
be considered worthy of further attention,
although future evaluations may reveal more
or less integrity than indicated by the ABPP
surveys.

3

For general guidance about integrity issues and National Register properties, see National Park Service, How to Apply the National
Register Criteria for Evaluation (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, revised 1997). The survey evaluations described
above do not meet the more stringent integrity standards for National Historic Landmark designation. See National Park Service,
How to Prepare National Historic Landmark Nominations (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, 1999), 36-37.
4
See 36 CFR 60.1- 14 for regulations about nominating a property to the National Register and 36 CFR 63 for regulations concerning
Determinations of Eligibility for inclusion in the National Register.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

6

The term integrity, as defined by the National Register of Historic Places, is “the ability of a
property to convey its significance.”5 While assessments of integrity are subjective,
battlefields can have integrity only if they can be positively located through research and
“ground-truthing,” and only if significant portions of the landscape’s historic terrain have
not been substantially disturbed. Other conditions contribute to the degree of integrity a
battlefield retains:
•

the quantity and quality of surviving battle-period resources (e.g.,
buildings, roads, fence lines, military structures, and archeological
features);

•

the quantity and quality of the spatial relationships between and among
those resources and the intervening terrain that connects them;

•

the extent to which current battlefield land use is similar to battle-period
land use; and

•

the extent to which a battlefield’s physical features and overall character
visually communicate an authentic sense of the sweep and setting of the
battle.

Natural changes in vegetation—woods growing out of historic farm fields, for example—
do not necessarily diminish the landscape’s integrity. Significant changes in land use since
the Civil War do affect integrity; the degree to which post-war development has altered
and fragmented the historic landscape and destroyed historic features is critical when
assessing integrity. Still, some post-battle development is expected; slight or moderate
change within the battlefield may not substantially diminish a battlefield’s integrity.
Often these post-battle “non-contributing” elements are included in the PotNR boundary
in accordance with National Register of Historic Places guidelines.
The Potential National Register boundaries therefore indicate which battlefields are likely
eligible for future listing in the National Register of Historic Places and likely deserving of
future preservation efforts. If a surveyor determined that a battlefield was entirely
compromised by land use incompatible with the preservation of historic features (i.e., it
has little or no integrity), it did not receive a PotNR boundary. In cases where a battlefield
was already listed in the National Register, surveyors reassessed the existing
documentation based on current scholarship and resource integrity, and, when
appropriate, provided new information and proposed new boundaries as part of the
surveys. As a result, some PotNR boundaries will contain lands already listed in the
National Register of Historic Places. In other cases, PotNR boundaries will exclude listed
lands that have lost integrity.6
The data from which all three boundaries are drawn do not necessarily reflect the full
research needed for a formal National Register nomination. Potential National Register
boundaries are based on an assessment of aboveground historic features associated with
the cultural and natural landscape. ABPP surveys did not include a professional
5

National Park Service, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, 1992 (Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources Division), 10. Archeological integrity was not
examined during this study, but should be considered in future battlefield studies and formal nominations to the National Register.
6
The ABPP’s survey and PotNR assessment of the Fort Stevens battlefield do not constitute formal action on behalf of the office of
the National Register of Historic Places. The PotNR assessment is re intended for planning purposes only; it does not carry the
authority to add, change, or remove an official listing.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

7

archeological inventory or assessment of subsurface features or indications. This report
does reflect the findings of four-year archeological study completed for the National Park
Service at Rock Creek Park in 2008. However, future archeological testing could help
further determine whether additional subsurface features remain, whether these
subsurface battle features convey important information about a battle or historic
property, and whether that information may help to confirm, refine, or refute the
boundaries previously determined by historic studies and terrain analysis.
The ABPP survey information should be reassessed during future compliance processes
such as the Section 106 process required by the National Historic Preservation Act7 and
Environmental Impact Statements/Environmental Assessments required by the National
Environmental Policy Act.8 Likewise, more detailed research and assessments should take
place when any battlefield is formally nominated to the National Register or proposed for
designation as a National Historic Landmark. New research and intensive-level surveys of
these sites will enlighten future preservation and compliance work. Agencies should
continue to consult local and state experts for up-to-date information about these
battlefields.
Isolated sites within the Fort Stevens battlefield are included on the National Register of
Historic Places as part of the “Civil War Fort Sites” (1974) and “Civil War Fort Sites
Boundary Increase” (1978) listings. Together, the sites of Fort Stevens, Fort Totten, Fort
DeRussy and Fort Bayard constitute approximately 26.00 acres of the “Civil War Fort Sites”
listing.9 The ABPP assigned a PotNR boundary to the Fort Stevens battlefield that
includes the previously listed fort sites and, based on the findings of Rock Creek Park’s
four-year archeological study, includes protected lands within Rock Creek Valley.

Questionnaire
While the ABPP maintains data about its own program activities at Civil War battlefields,
most preservation work occurs at the local level. Therefore, to carry out the Congressional
directive for information about activities at the battlefields, the ABPP sought input from
local battlefield managers and advocacy organizations. The ABPP distributed
questionnaires designed to gather information about the types of preservation activities
that have taken place at the battlefields since 1993. The Questionnaire is reproduced in
Appendix B.
Responses were provided by representatives from the National Park Service administrative
unit of Rock Creek Park, which manages park areas within the Fort Stevens battlefield
Study Area boundaries. Input from this source, combined with the survey findings,
allowed the ABPP to create a profile of conditions and activities at the battlefield.

7

16 USC 470f.
42 USC 4331-4332.
9
Although the boundaries of this NRHP listing include 19 fort sites, collectively known as the “Fort Circle Parks” or “Civil
War Defenses of Washington,” only four of the listed sites lie within the Fort Stevens battlefield Study Area.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia
8

8

Figure 3. Fort Totten earthworks, damaged by erosion and insensitive recreational uses.
Photograph by Lisa Rupple, 2004.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

9

Summary of Conditions of the District of Columbia’s Civil War
Battlefield
Quantified Land Areas
Using a Geographic Information System (GIS), the ABPP calculated the amount of land
historically associated with the battle (Study Area), the amount of land where forces were
engaged (Core Area), and the amount of land that may retain enough integrity to be
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places and that remains to be
protected (Potential National Register boundary).
As Table 1 illustrates, the Study Area and Core Area of Fort Stevens have been revised. In
particular, the original CWSAC surveys did not consistently include routes of approach and
withdrawal or secondary actions that influenced the course or outcome of the battle. The
revised boundaries take these movements and actions into account. In some instances,
new or additional research has sharpened our understanding of battle events. Therefore,
the ABPP determined that additional lands belonged appropriately in the Study and Core
Areas because they lend additional understanding to the battle story. Please see the
individual battlefield profile at the end of this report for more information about the
extent of and reasons for any revisions to the CWSAC Study Area and Core Area
boundaries.

Table 1. Battlefield Area Statistics
Battlefield

  
   Fort Stevens (DC001)
  
  

  

Boundary
Type

Established/Revised*

Acres

Study Area
Core Area
PotNR

2009
2009
2009

9,103.32
2,765.73
1,166.01

*If the CWSAC's 1993 Study and Core Area boundaries were confirmed during this update, they
remain listed as established in 1993. If the ABPP adjusted the boundaries based on research or
refined survey methods, the year in which the revision was made is given.

  
  
  
  

  

Condition Assessment
Using ABPP field survey data and research findings from the archeological study completed
for the National Park Service at Rock Creek Park in 2008,10 the ABPP assessed the overall
condition of the battlefield Study Area. At Fort Stevens, most of the aboveground
landscape and terrain features have been altered beyond recognition over the past 150
years. During the 1860s, this area was rural. Today, more than half of the aboveground
battlefield features in the Study Area have been lost to urbanization. In the battlefield
Core Area, nearly all of the historic landscape is gone. In areas of development, the
battlefield terrain’s integrity has been destroyed by the District of Columbia’s residential,
commercial, and transportation infrastructure.
Terrain features protected within Rock Creek Park are the only aboveground portions of
the Fort Stevens battlefield to retain any historic integrity, and some of these areas are
10

John Bedell, Eric Griffitts, Charles LeeDecker, Stuart Piedel, and Jason Shellenhamer, “Bold Rocky, and Picturesque, Archeological
Overview and Assessment and Archeological Identification and Evaluation Study of Rock Creek Park,” (Washington, DC: The Louis
Berger Group, Inc., 2008).
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

10

compromised as well. The forts at Fort Reno and Fort Slocum are entirely lost, while the
landscape of Fort Bayard, although still used as a recreational park, retains limited,
identifiable terrain features to associate it with the battle. The outline of this fort only
protrudes a few inches above grade.
Topographical features that informed the military siting decisions at forts Reno, Bayard,
Slocum, Totten, and DeRussy are still identifiable. These forts sit on the high ground, and,
at some locations, still offer a limited view of the surrounding area. However, views from
each of these sites are impeded by adjacent buildings, trees, and radio towers.
Of the six forts within the Fort Stevens battlefield Study Area, Fort DeRussy is in the best
state of preservation. In the early 1920s, this site, along with Fort Totten, was revegetated to prevent earthworks erosion. Since 2000, new earthwork management
guidelines have been adopted in response to overgrowth of vegetation. Today, the
outline of the parapet, which consists of high earthen mounds with embrasures, and the
deep ditch (dry moat) around the parapet wall, remain distinct. There is visible evidence
of the location of powder magazines inside the fort. Beyond the dry moat, well-defined
rifle trenches extend in each direction.
In 1937, the Civilian Conservation Corps reconstructed portions of Fort Stevens using
policies and materials that were best practice at the time. Today, the National Park Service
plans to restore the reconstruction. Its concrete materials are deteriorating, threatening to
damage what original earthen features remain beneath.
At Fort Totten, the integrity of authentic earthworks is threatened by neighborhood
residents who use the “obstacles” for dirt bike and motorbike stunts. Erosion of the
earthworks is clearly visible where bikers wear new paths and use existing paths on and
inside of the fort. Dense vegetation has overgrown the historic earthworks, making them
susceptible to damage from falling trees. Given these conditions, efforts to stabilize Fort
Totten are planned. The National Park Service is monitoring vegetation growth in order to
identify immediate hazards and remove them.
Within the Rock Creek Valley portion of the NPS’ Rock Creek Park administration area,
terrain features used by Confederates to mask their approach on the left flank of Fort
Stevens are still present. According to the previously cited four-year archeological study
undertaken in Rock Creek Park, artifacts dating to the Battle of Fort Stevens have also
been found in Rock Creek Valley north of Fort DeRussy.11 Together, these terrain features
and archeological findings help characterize Rock Creek Valley as the largest, most intact
portion of Fort Stevens battlefield.

11

Ibid., 220.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

11

Table 2. Condition Summary
Condition

Battlefield

Land use is little changed (0)

NA

Portions of landscape have been altered, but most
essential features remain (0)

NA

Much of the landscape has been altered and fragmented,
leaving some essential features (0)

Fort Stevens

Landscape and terrain have been altered beyond
recognition (0)

NA

Battlefields that were not assessed (0)

NA

Registration
The nation’s official method for recognizing historic properties worthy of preservation is
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Registered battlefields meet
national standards for documentation, physical integrity, and demonstrable significance to
the history of our nation. Federal, state, and local agencies use information from the
National Register as a planning tool to identify and make decisions about cultural
resources. Federal and state laws, most notably Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, require agencies to account for the effects their projects (roads,
wetland permits, quarrying, cell towers, etc.) may have on listed and eligible historic
properties, such as battlefields. Listing allows project designers to quickly identify the
battlefield and avoid or minimize impacts to the landscape.
Properties listed in the National Register are also eligible for numerous federal and state
historic preservation grant programs. Recognition as a registered battlefield may also
advance public understanding of and appreciation for the battlefield, and may encourage
advocacy for its preservation.12
As mentioned previously, small geographically discontiguous portions of the Fort Stevens
battlefield were included in the NRHP in 1974 and 1978. These listed sites encompass only
26.28 acres of the battlefield’s total area. Given the nearly complete urbanization of the
historic landscape, ABPP did not identify additional lands beyond Rock Creek Park as
having eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP. However, within Rock Creek Park, ABPP
recognizes a potential for expanding the existing National Register boundary associated
with this battlefield to include portions of Rock Creek Valley. Rock Creek Park’s four-year
archeological study found “a rather thin scatter of bullets and shell fragments across a

12

There are three levels of federal recognition for historic properties – Congressional designations, such as national park units,
National Historic Landmarks, and listings in the National Register of Historic Places. Congress creates national park units. The
Secretary of the Interior designates National Historic Landmarks (NHL) – nationally significant historic sites – for their exceptional
value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the heritage of the United States. The National Park Service, in partnership with states,
lists cultural sites significant at the national, state, or local level and worthy of preservation on the NRHP. National park units and
NHLs are also treated as listed in the National Register.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

12

wide swath of the park.”13 Management recommendations highlighted within the 2008
report conclude that the battlefield could include most of the park from Fort DeRussy
northward, and suggest further work could allow delineation of firing lines, troop
movements, key terrain, and other significant battlefield features.

Stewardship
While the majority of Fort Stevens battlefield terrain features have been lost to urban
development, the NPS does own and manage more than 3.00 acres at Fort Stevens
(reconstruction), more than 12.00 acres at Fort Totten, more than 6.00 acres at Fort
DeRussy, and more than 4.00 acres at Fort Bayard. These areas of intact battlefield land,
totaling more than 26.00 acres, are administered as portions of Rock Creek Park. In 2004,
the NPS developed the “Fort Circle Parks Final Management Plan” to help guide
stewardship of all 19 Civil War Defenses of Washington sites, including the four surviving
forts located within the Fort Stevens Study Area.
In addition to these four Fort Circle Parks, the NPS administers a 1,166.01-acre swath of
battlefield landscape in the Rock Creek Valley portion of Rock Creek Park. Stewardship of
this area includes engagement in the four-year archeological study cited within this report.
Future activities could include additional archeological investigation and interpretation of
this area as a battlefield landscape.
Given the ABPP’s determination that there is no additional intact battlefield landscape
within the Fort Stevens Study Area to protect and preserve, opportunity for new
stewardship seems limited to commemoration in areas outside of NPS-owned land.

Public Access and Interpretation
In its questionnaire, the ABPP asked battlefield stewards about the types of public access
and interpretation available at the battlefield. The ABPP did not collect information about
the purpose or intent of the interpretation and access, such as whether a wayside exhibit
was developed for purely educational reasons, to promote heritage tourism, or boost local
economic development.
The ABPP asked respondents to indicate the type of interpretation available at or about
the battlefield. The categories included brochures, driving tours, living history
demonstrations, maintained historic features or areas, walking tours and trails, wayside
exhibits, websites, and other specialized programs. The results indicate that the surviving
Circle Forts within Rock Creek Park – Fort Stevens, Fort Totten, Fort DeRussy, and Fort
Bayard – currently do provide public interpretation and educational opportunities.
While there is no visitor center associated with the Fort Stevens battlefield, tours of the
fort reconstruction – including concrete parapet walls, magazine, dry moat, and mounted
cannon replicas – have been conducted by NPS park rangers since 1981. A podcast was
also developed for the site in 2007 and wayside signage was replaced in 2009.
The parks at Fort Totten and Fort DeRussy offer wooded walking trails. New interpretive
signage was installed at these sites in June 2009. The Fort Bayard park is currently used as

13

Bedell, et al., “Bold Rocky, and Picturesque”, 229.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

13

an athletic recreation area with fields for softball and soccer, but one interpretive sign
communicates the site’s history.
Battleground National Cemetery, which is located within the battlefield Study Area and
administered as part of Rock Creek Park, was established after the battle of Fort Stevens
to commemorate the location where Union soldiers were buried when fighting concluded.
Interpretive signs at the cemetery highlight the events and aftermath of the battle.14
In addition to NPS interpretation efforts, a “Fort Stevens Day” event has been held since
1989 by the local residents to commemorate the battle’s impact on the development of
their neighborhood. As an extension of this activity, the Brightwood community and
Cultural Tourism DC organization developed interpretive signage for the “Battleground to
Community: Brightwood Heritage Trail,” which incorporates the history of the battle of
Fort Stevens.

Local Advocacy
Nonprofit organizations play important roles in protecting historic battlefields. These
groups step in to preserve historic sites when public funding and management for historic
preservation are absent. When public funding is available, nonprofits serve as vital
partners in public-private preservation efforts, acting as conduits for public funds, raising
critical private matching funds, keeping history and preservation in the public eye, and
working with landowners to find ways to protect battlefield parcels. While the Fort
Stevens battlefield does not have an organization dedicated solely to its protection,
interpretation, and promotion, a nonprofit organization known as the Fort Circle Parks
Alliance has emerged to support public education and preservation advocacy for surviving
sites associated with the Civil War defenses of Washington.

14

National Register of Historic Places, “Battleground National Cemetery National Register of Historic Places Inventory –
Nomination Form,” (Washington, DC: National Park Service), http://pdfhost.focus.nps.gov/docs/NRHP/Text/66000032.pdf,
September 2009.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

14

Individual Battlefield Profile
Battlefield Profile Glossary
Location

County or city in which the battlefield is located.

Campaign

Name of military campaign of which the battle was part. Campaign
names are taken from The War of the Rebellion: a Compilation of the
Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies.

Battle Date(s)

Day or days upon which the battle took place, as determined by the
Civil War Sites Advisory Commission.

Principal Commanders Ranking commanders of opposing forces during the battle.
Forces Engaged

Name or description of largest units engaged during the battle.

Results

Indicates battle victor or inconclusive outcome.

Study Area

Acres within the Study Area (see Table 1), as determined by the ABPP,
that represent the historic extent of the battle upon the landscape.

Potential National
Register Lands

Acres of land that retain historic character and may be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (see Table 1).

Protected Lands

Estimated acres (based on questionnaires and GIS) of battlefield land
set aside or placed under permanent easement since the Civil War for
the purposes of maintaining the historic character of the landscape
and for preventing future impairment or destruction of the landscape
and historic features.

Publicly Accessible
Lands

Estimated acres (based on responses to questionnaires) maintained
for public visitation.

Management Area

Name of historic site, park, or other area maintained for resource
protection and/or public visitation.

Friends Group(s)

Name of local advocacy organization(s) that support preservation
activities at/for the battlefield.

Preservation
Activities
Since 1993

Indicates which types of preservation activities have taken place at
the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses to questionnaires).

Public
Interpretation
Since 1993

Indicates which types of interpretation/educational activities have
taken place at the battlefield since 1993 (based on
responses to questionnaires).

Condition Statement The ABPP’s assessment of the overall condition of the battlefield’s
Study Area (based on field surveys and responses to questionnaires).
Historical Designation Notes the most prestigious historical designation the battlefield
has received (i.e. national park unit, National Historic Landmark, or
National Register of Historic Places).
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

15

Fort Stevens (DC001)
Location

District of Columbia

Campaign

Early’s Raid and Operations against the B&O Railroad (1864)

Battle Date(s)

July 11-12, 1864

Principal Commanders

Maj. Gen. Horatio G. Wright and Maj. Gen. Alexander M. McCook
[US]; Lt. Gen. Jubal A. Early [CS]

Forces Engaged

The District of Columbia Legion, 400 [US]; Morgan’s Cavalry
Division, 1,800 [CS]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

9,103.32 acres
The revised Study Area includes the Confederate avenue of approach
from the north towards the City of Washington’s outlying
fortifications. It also includes the route Union forces marched from
the 6th Street docks on the Potomac River through the streets of
Washington to bolster the defenses at Fort Stevens and Fort DeRussy
where the primary action occurred.

Potential National
Register Lands

1,166.01 acres

Protected Lands

1,424.11 acres
National Park Service, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

1,424.11 acres
Rock Creek Park, National Park Service

Management Area(s)

Rock Creek Park

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
http://www.nps.gov/cwdw/historyculture/fort-stevens.htm

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

16

Condition Statement

Only those portions of the battlefield owned by the NPS retain
integrity. All other areas have been altered beyond recognition since
he period of significance due to intense growth of the surrounding
metropolitan area.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (1974 and 1978)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

17

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

18

Appendices
Appendix A. Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002
Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December 2002
Amends the American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k)

An Act
To amend the American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior
to establish a battlefield acquisition grant program.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ``Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002''.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
(a) Findings.--Congress finds the following
(1) Civil War battlefields provide a means for the people of
the United States to understand a tragic period in the history
of the United States.
(2) According to the Report on the Nation's Civil War
Battlefields, prepared by the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission, and dated July 1993, of the 384 principal Civil War
battlefields-(A) almost 20 percent are lost or fragmented;
(B) 17 percent are in poor condition; and
(C) 60 percent have been lost or are in imminent
danger of being fragmented by development and lost as
coherent historic sites.
(b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-(1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect
nationally significant Civil War battlefields through
conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
(2) to create partnerships among State and local
governments, regional entities, and the private sector to
preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil War
battlefields.
SEC. 3. BATTLEFIELD ACQUISITION GRANT PROGRAM.
The American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k) is amended-(1) by redesignating subsection (d) as paragraph (3) of
subsection (c), and indenting appropriately;
(2) in paragraph (3) of subsection (c) (as redesignated by
paragraph (1))—
(A) by striking ``Appropriations'' and inserting
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

19

``appropriations''; and
(B) by striking ``section'' and inserting
``subsection'';
(3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following
``(d) Battlefield Acquisition Grant Program.-``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection
``(A) Battlefield report.--The term `Battlefield
Report' means the document entitled `Report on the
Nation's Civil War Battlefields', prepared by the Civil
War Sites Advisory Commission, and dated July 1993.
``(B) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity'
means a State or local government.
``(C) Eligible site.--The term `eligible site' means
a site-``(i) that is not within the exterior
boundaries of a unit of the National Park System;
and
``(ii) that is identified in the Battlefield
Report.
``(D) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the
Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American
Battlefield Protection Program.
``(2) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a
battlefield acquisition grant program under which the Secretary
may provide grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share
of the cost of acquiring interests in eligible sites for the
preservation and protection of those eligible sites.
``(3) Nonprofit partners.--An eligible entity may acquire an
interest in an eligible site using a grant under this subsection
in partnership with a nonprofit organization.
``(4) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the total
cost of acquiring an interest in an eligible site under this
subsection shall be not less than 50 percent.
``(5) Limitation on land use.--An interest in an eligible
site acquired under this subsection shall be subject to section
6(f)(3) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16
U.S.C. 460l-8(f)(3)).
``(6) Reports.-``(A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the
date of the enactment of this subparagraph, the
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the
activities carried out under this subsection.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--Not later than
2 years after the date of the enactment of this
subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a
report that updates the Battlefield Report to reflect-``(i) preservation activities carried out at
the 384 battlefields during the period between
publication of the Battlefield Report and the
update;
``(ii) changes in the condition of the
battlefields during that period; and
``(iii) any other relevant developments
relating to the battlefields during that period.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

20

``(7) Authorization of appropriations.-``(A) In general.--There are authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary from the Land and Water
Conservation Fund to provide grants under this
subsection $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004
through 2008.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--There are
authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry
out paragraph (6)(B), $500,000.''; and
(4) in subsection (e)-(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``as of'' and all
that follows through the period and inserting ``on
September 30, 2008.''; and
(B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and provide
battlefield acquisition grants'' after ``studies''.

-end-

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

21

Appendix B. Battlefield Questionnaire
State
Battlefield
Person Completing Form
Date of completion

I. Protected Lands of the Battlefield (“Protected lands” are these “owned” for historic
preservation or conservation purposes. Please provide information on land protected since 1993.)
1) Identify protected lands by parcel since 1993. Then answer these questions about each parcel,
following example in the chart below. What is the acreage of each parcel? Is parcel owned fee
simple, by whom? Is there is an easement, if so name easement holder? Was the land purchased or
the easement conveyed after 1993? What was cost of purchase or easement? What was source of
funding and the amount that source contributed? Choose from these possible sources: Coin money,
LWCF, Farm Bill, State Government, Local Government, Private Owner, Private Non-Profit (provide
name), or Other (describe).
Parcel

Acres Owner

Easement Year

Cost

Source

Joe Smith Farm

194

Private

SHPO

1995

$500,000

LWCF/$250,000
Private/$250,000

Sue Jones Tract

16

Battlefield Friends, Inc. No

2002

$41,000

State/$20,000
BFI/$21,000

2) Other public or non-profit lands within the battlefield? (Y/N)
•

If yes, describe

•

Name of public or non-profit owner or easement holder

•

Number of Acres owned/held

3) Is the information in a GIS? (Y/N)
If yes, may NPS obtain a copy of the data? (Y/N)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

22

II. Preservation Groups
1) Is there a formal interested entity (friends group, etc) associated with the battlefield? (Y/N)
If yes
Name
Address
Phone
Fax
E-mail
Web site? (Y/N)
If yes, what is the URL?
Does the web site have a preservation message? (Y/N)
What year did the group form?

III. Public Access and Interpretation
1) Does the site have designated Public Access? (Y/N) (Count public roads if there are designated
interpretive signs or pull-offs)
If yes, what entity provides the public access (Access may occur on lands owned in fee or under
easement to the above entities)
Federal government
State government
Local government

Private Nonprofit organization
Private owner
Other

Name of entity (if applicable)
Number of Acres Accessible to the Public (size of the area in which the public may physically visit
without trespassing. Do not include viewsheds.)

2) Does the site have interpretation? (Y/N)
If yes, what type of interpretation is available?
Visitor Center
Brochure(s)
Wayside exhibits
Driving Tour
Walking Tour

Audio tour tapes
Maintained historic features/areas
Living History
Website
Other

IV. Registration
Applies only to the battlefield landscape, not to individual contributing features of a battlefield
(i.e., the individually listed Dunker Church property of .2 acres does not represent the Antietam
battlefield for the purposes of this exercise)
1) Is the site a designated National Historic Landmark? (Y/N)
If yes, NHL and ID Number
2) Is the site listed in the National Register? (Y/N)
If yes, NRHP Name and ID Number
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

23

3) Is the site listed in the State Register? (Y/N)
If yes, State Register Name and ID Number
4) Is the site in the State Inventory? (Y/N)
If yes, State Inventory Name and ID Number
5)

Is the site designated as a local landmark or historic site? (Y/N)
Type of Designation/Listing

V. Program Activities
What types of preservation program activities have occurred at the battlefield? Provide
final product name and date if applicable (e.g., Phase I Archeological Survey Report on the
Piper Farm, 1994 and Antietam Preservation Plan, 2001, etc.)
1) Research and Documentation

2) Cultural Resource surveys and inventories (building/structure and landscape
inventories, archeological surveys, landscape surveys, etc.)

3) Planning Projects (preservation plans, site management plans, cultural landscape
reports, etc.)

4) Interpretation Projects (also includes education)

5) Advocacy (any project meant to engage the public in a way that would benefit the
preservation of the site, e.g. PR, lobbying, public outreach, petitioning for action,
etc.)

6) Legislation (any local, state, or federal legislation designed to encourage
preservation of the battlefield individually or together with other similar sites)

7) Fundraising
a. To support program activities?
b. To support land acquisition/easements?

8) Other

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

24

Appendix C. Civil War Battlefield Land Acquisition Grants
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (PL 107-359) amended the American
Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 USC 469k) to authorize a matching grant program to
assist States and local communities in acquiring significant Civil War battlefield lands for
permanent protection. Most recently, Congress showed its continued support for these
grants through its reauthorization of this program within the Omnibus Public Land
Management Act of 2009 (PL 111-11).
Eligible battlefields are those listed in the 1993 Report on the Nation’s Civil War
Battlefields prepared by the Congressionally-chartered Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
(CWSAC). Eligible acquisition projects may be for fee interest in land or for a protective
interest such as a perpetual easement.
Since 1998, Congress has appropriated a total of $38.9 million for this Civil War Battlefield
Land Acquisition Grants (CWBLAG). These grants have assisted in the permanent
protection of more than 15,742 acres at 61 Civil War battlefields in 14 states. To date, no
CWBLAG grants have been awarded in the District of Columbia. Given ABPP’s
determination that only NPS-owned portions of the Fort Stevens Study Area retain
enough integrity to warrant assignment of a PotNR boundary, funding for land acquisition
in the District of Columbia through this program will be unlikely unless additional
archeological investigation indicates the presence of significant, intact battlefield
resources in additional areas.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

25

Appendix D. American Battlefield Protection Program Planning Grants
Since 1992, ABPP has offered annual planning grants to nonprofit organizations, academic
institutions, and local, regional, state, and tribal governments to help protect battlefields
located on American soil. Applicants are encouraged to work with partner organizations
and federal, State and local government agencies as early as possible to integrate their
efforts into a larger battle site protection strategy.
While ABPP has not yet awarded funding to projects associated with the District of
Columbia’s Civil War battlefield, the program has granted nearly $9.5 million to 379
projects throughout the country. Projects associated with portions of the Fort Stevens
battlefield Study Area that are not owned by the National Park Service are eligible to
receive funding from this program.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT - District of Columbia

26

