U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Washington, DC
March 2010

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program
Washington, DC
March 2010

Authority
The American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996, as amended by the Civil War
Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December
2002), directs the Secretary of the Interior to update the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields.

Acknowledgments
National Park Service (NPS) Project Team Paul Hawke, Project Leader; Kathleen
Madigan, Survey Coordinator; Tanya Gossett and January Ruck, Reporting; Matthew
Borders, Historian; Kristie Kendall, Program Assistant.
Battlefield Surveyor(s) Lisa Rupple, American Battlefield Protection Program.
Respondents Kathi Schue, Gettysburg Battlefield Preservation Association; Elliott Gruber,
Gettysburg Foundation; Greg Coco, Brion Fitzgerald, Troy Harman, Scott Hartwig, and
Katie Lawhon, Gettysburg National Military Park; Larry Wallace, Hanover Battlefield
Historian; Susan Star Paddock, No Casino Gettysburg; and Sarah Kipp, The Land
Conservancy of Adams County

Cover: View of the Trostle Farm at Gettysburg National Military Park, Adams County,
Pennsylvania. Photograph by Katie Lawhon, 2009.

Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ............................................................................................. 1
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 3
SYNOPSIS ................................................................................................................. 5
METHOD STATEMENT .............................................................................................. 6
RESEARCH AND FIELD SURVEYS ................................................................................................. 6
QUESTIONNAIRES .................................................................................................................... 9
SUMMARY OF CONDITIONS OF PENNSYLVANIA’S CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELDS .... 10
QUANTIFIED LAND AREAS ...................................................................................................... 10
CONDITION ASSESSMENTS ...................................................................................................... 10
REGISTRATION ...................................................................................................................... 13
STEWARDSHIP ....................................................................................................................... 14
PUBLIC ACCESS AND INTERPRETATION ...................................................................................... 14
LOCAL ADVOCACY ................................................................................................................ 15
INDIVIDUAL BATTLEFIELD PROFILES ..................................................................... 17
APPENDICES .......................................................................................................... 25
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B.
APPENDIX C.
APPENDIX D.

CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD PRESERVATION ACT OF 2002 ........................................... 25
BATTLEFIELD QUESTIONNAIRE ............................................................................. 28
CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD LAND ACQUISITION GRANTS ............................................. 31
AMERICAN BATTLEFIELD PROTECTION PROGRAM PLANNING GRANTS........................ 32

Introduction
The information in this report fulfills, in part, the purposes of the Civil War Battlefield
Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016). Those purposes are:
1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect nationally significant Civil
War battlefields through conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
2) to create partnerships among state and local governments, regional entities, and
the private sector to preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil
War battlefields.
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 directs the Secretary of the Interior,
acting through the American Battlefield Protection Program (ABPP) of the National Park
Service, to update the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s
Civil War Battlefields. The CWSAC was established by Congress in 1991 and published its
report in 1993. Congress provided funding for this update in FY 2005 and FY 2007.
Congress asked that the updated report reflect the following:
•
•
•

Preservation activities carried out at the 384 battlefields identified by the CWSAC
during the period between 1993 and the update;
Changes in the condition of the battlefields during that period; and
Any other relevant developments relating to the battlefields during that period.

In accordance with the legislation, this report presents information about Civil War
battlefields in Pennsylvania for use by Congress, federal, state, and local government
agencies, landowners, and other interest groups. Other state reports will be issued as
surveys and analyses are completed.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

3

Figure 1. CWSAC Battlefields in Pennsylvania.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

4

Synopsis
In 1993, the CWSAC recognized two battlefields in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania –
Gettysburg and Hanover. Historically, these battlefields encompassed more than 49,700
acres. Almost 34,000 acres of battlefield terrain survives at Gettysburg, retaining
sufficient significance and integrity merit preservation. At Hanover, the battlefield
landscape has been destroyed.
When the CWSAC published its findings nearly two decades ago, Gettysburg was ranked
among the nation’s top priorities for battlefield preservation. Today, there are more than
8,200 acres of protected land at Gettysburg. While much of the protected land is owned
by the National Park Service as part of the Gettysburg National Military Park, private nonprofit organizations have saved more than 3,000 acres by acquiring land and purchasing
development rights through protective easements.
The conditions at Hanover are much different from those at Gettysburg. The CWSAC did
not provide a preservation priority ranking for Hanover in 1993, and the battlefield has
not benefited from federal preservation efforts or the activities of private nonprofit
preservation groups. There is no protected land at Hanover, and the isolated fragments
of intact land that survive are too small to convey a sense of the historic battlefield’s
setting and scope.
Given these conditions, long-range preservation planning and public-private efforts at
Gettysburg should continue with consistent and increased vigor. The battlefield terrain
that has already been lost at Gettysburg was destroyed by the sprawl of development
from town, and this threat will not likely dissipate. There is no potential for landscape
preservation at Hanover, but opportunities still exist for battle interpretation and
commemoration.
As part of the field research undertaken for this update, conditions at the two battlefields
have been assessed and the American Battlefield Protection Program has established
boundaries for Gettysburg and Hanover.
Once all CWSAC battlefields nationwide have been reassessed and all state updates have
been completed, the National Park Service will issue updated preservation priorities for
Gettysburg and Hanover.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

5

Method Statement
Congress instructed the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American Battlefield
Protection Program (ABPP), to report on changes in the condition of the battlefields since
1993 and on “preservation activities” and “other relevant developments” carried out at
each battlefield since 1993. To fulfill those assignments, the ABPP 1) conducted site
surveys of each battlefield and 2) prepared and sent out questionnaires to battlefield
managers and advocacy organizations (see Appendix B).

Research and Field Surveys
The ABPP conducted the field assessments of Pennsylvania battlefields in November 2005
The surveys entailed additional historical research, on-the-ground documentation and
assessment of site conditions, identification of impending threats to each site, and site
mapping. Surveyors used a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver to map historic
features of each battlefield and used Geographic Information System (GIS) software to
draw site boundaries. The ABPP retains all final survey materials. Each battlefield survey
file includes a survey form (field notes, list of defining features, list of documentary
sources, and a photo log), photographs, spatial coordinates of significant features, and
boundaries described on USGS topographic maps. The surveys did not include
archeological investigations for reasons of time and expense.
Study Areas and Core Areas
The CWSAC identified a Study Area and a Core Area for each principal battlefield (see
Figure 2). The CWSAC boundaries have proven invaluable as guides to local land and
resource preservation efforts at Civil War battlefields. However, since 1993, the National
Park Service has refined its battlefield survey methodology, which include research,
working with site stewards, identifying and documenting lines of approach and
withdrawal used by opposing forces, and applying the concepts of military terrain analysis
to all battlefield landscapes. The ABPP’s Battlefield Survey Manual explains the field
methods employed during this study.1 The surveys also incorporate the concepts
recommended in the National Register of Historic Places’ Bulletin 40, Guidelines for
Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, which was revised
in 1999.
Using its refined methodology, the ABPP was able to validate or adjust the CWSAC’s Study
Area and Core Area boundaries to reflect more accurately the full nature and original
resources of these battlefields (see Table 2). At both battlefields in Pennsylvania, the
refined methodology resulted in significant increases in the size of Study Areas, Core
Areas, or both. However, it is important to note that the Study Area and Core Area
boundaries are simply historical boundaries that describe where the battle took place;
neither indicates the current integrity of the battlefield landscape, so neither can be used
on its own to identify surviving portions of battlefield land that may merit protection and
preservation (see Figure 2).

1

American Battlefield Protection Program, “Battlefield Survey Manual,” (Washington, DC: National Park Service, revised 2007).
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

6

Potential National Register
Boundaries
To address the question of what part of
the battlefield remains reasonably intact
and warrants preservation, this study
introduced a third boundary line that was
not attempted by the CWSAC: the
Potential National Register boundary (see
Figure 2).
Looking at each Study Area, the surveyors
assigned PotNR boundaries where they
judged that enough of the battlefield
landscape remained to convey the
significance of the engagement. In a few
cases, the PotNR boundary encompasses
the entire Study Area. In most cases,
however, the PotNR boundary includes
less land than identified in the full Study
Area.
In assigning PotNR boundaries, the ABPP
followed National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) guidelines when identifying
and mapping areas that retain integrity
and cohesion within the Study Areas.2
However, because the ABPP focuses only
on areas of battle, the ABPP did not
evaluate lands adjacent to the Study Area
that may contribute to a broader
historical and chronological definition of
“cultural landscape.” Lands outside of
the Study Area associated with other
historic events and cultural practices may
need to be evaluated in preparation for a
formal nomination of the cultural
landscape.

Figure 2: Boundary Definitions
The Study Area represents the historic extent
of the battle as it unfolded across the
landscape. The Study Area contains resources
known to relate to or contribute to the battle
event: where troops maneuvered and
deployed, immediately before and after
combat, and where they fought during
combat. Historic accounts, terrain analysis,
and feature identification inform the
delineation of the Study Area boundary. The
Study Area indicates the extent to which
historic and archeological resources associated
with the battle (areas of combat, command,
communications, logistics, medical services,
etc.) may be found and protected. Surveyors
delineated Study Area boundaries for every
battle site that was positively identified
through research and field survey, regardless
of its present integrity.
The Core Area represents the areas of
fighting on the battlefield. Positions that
delivered or received fire, and the intervening
space and terrain between them, fall within
the Core Area. Frequently described as
“hallowed ground,” land within the Core
Area is often the first to be targeted for
protection. The Core Area lies within the
Study Area.
Unlike the Study and Core Areas, which are
based only upon the interpretation of historic
events, the Potential National Register
(PotNR) boundary represents ABPP’s
assessment of a Study Area’s current integrity
(the surviving landscape and features that
convey the site’s historic sense of place). The
PotNR boundary may include all or some of
the Study Area, and all or some of the Core
Area. Lands within PotNR boundaries should
be considered worthy of further attention,
although future evaluations may reveal more
or less integrity than indicated by the ABPP
surveys.

Most importantly, the PotNR boundary
does not constitute a formal
determination of eligibility by the
Keeper of the National Register of
Historic Places.3 The PotNR boundary is
designed to be used as a planning tool for
government agencies and the public. Like
the Study and Core Area boundaries, the PotNR boundary places no restriction on private
property use.
2

For general guidance about integrity issues and National Register properties, see National Park Service, How to Apply the National
Register Criteria for Evaluation (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, revised 1997). The survey evaluations described
above do not meet the more stringent integrity standards for National Historic Landmark designation. See National Park Service,
How to Prepare National Historic Landmark Nominations (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, 1999), 36-37.
3
See 36 CFR 60.1-14 for regulations about nominating a property to the National Register and 36 CFR 63 for regulations concerning
Determinations of Eligibility for inclusion in the National Register.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

7

The term integrity, as defined by the NRHP, is “the ability of a property to convey its
significance.”4 While assessments of integrity are subjective, battlefields can have integrity
only if they can be positively located through research and “ground-truthing,” and only if
significant portions of the landscape’s historic terrain have not been substantially
disturbed. Other conditions contribute to the degree of integrity a battlefield retains:
•

the quantity and quality of surviving battle-period resources (e.g.,
buildings, roads, fence lines, military structures, and archeological
features);

•

the quantity and quality of the spatial relationships between and among
those resources and the intervening terrain that connects them;

•

the extent to which current battlefield land use is similar to battle-period
land use; and

•

the extent to which a battlefield’s physical features and overall character
visually communicate an authentic sense of the sweep and setting of the
battle.

Natural changes in vegetation—woods growing out of historic farm fields, for example—
do not necessarily diminish the landscape’s integrity. Significant changes in land use since
the Civil War do affect integrity; the degree to which post-war development has altered
and fragmented the historic landscape and destroyed historic features is critical when
assessing integrity. Still, some post-battle development is expected; slight or moderate
change within the battlefield may not substantially diminish a battlefield’s integrity.
Often these post-battle “non-contributing” elements are included in the PotNR boundary
in accordance with National Register of Historic Places guidelines.
The Potential National Register boundaries therefore indicate which battlefields are likely
eligible for future listing in the NRHP and likely deserving of future preservation efforts. If
a surveyor determined that a battlefield was entirely compromised by land use
incompatible with the preservation of historic features (i.e., it has little or no integrity), it
did not receive a PotNR boundary.
In cases where a battlefield is already listed in the NRHP, surveyors reassessed the existing
documentation based on current scholarship and resource integrity, and, when
appropriate, provided new information and proposed new boundaries as part of the
surveys. As a result, some PotNR boundaries will contain or share a boundary with lands
already listed in the NRHP. In other cases, PotNR boundaries will exclude listed lands that
have lost integrity. (See Tables 3 and 4 for boundary comparisons.)5
The data from which all three boundaries are drawn do not necessarily reflect the full
research needed for a formal NRHP nomination. Potential National Register boundaries
are based on an assessment of aboveground historic features associated with the cultural
4

National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992 , Revised 1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources
Division), http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf. Archeological integrity was not examined during this
study, but should be considered in future battlefield studies and formal nominations to the National Register.
5
The ABPP’s surveys and PotNR assessments do not constitute formal action on behalf of the office of the National Register of
Historic Places. PotNR assessments are intended for planning purposes only; they do not carry the authority to add, change, or
remove an official listing.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

8

and natural landscape. The surveys did not include a professional archeological inventory
or assessment of subsurface features or indications. In some cases, future archeological
testing will help determine whether subsurface features remain, whether subsurface battle
features convey important information about a battle or historic property, and whether
that information may help to confirm, refine, or refute the boundaries previously
determined by historic studies and terrain analysis.
The ABPP survey information should be reassessed during future compliance processes
such as the Section 106 process required by the National Historic Preservation Act6 and
Environmental Impact Statements/Environmental Assessments required by the National
Environmental Policy Act.7 Likewise, more detailed research and assessments should take
place when any battlefield is formally nominated to the NRHP or proposed for designation
as a National Historic Landmark (NHL). New research and intensive-level surveys of these
sites will enlighten future preservation and compliance work. Agencies should continue to
consult local and state experts for up-to-date information about these battlefields.
While lands within the Gettysburg National Military Park and Gettysburg Battlefield
Historic District are already listed in the NRHP (see Table 3), the ABPP has identified a
PotNR boundary within the Gettysburg Study Area that could guide efforts to expand
existing NRHP boundaries. Based on the ABPP’s evaluation, an additional 21,000 acres
within the Study Area could be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP. At Hanover, there is
not enough intact battlefield terrain available to warrant recognition by the National
Register of Historic Places.

Questionnaires
While the ABPP maintains data about its own program activities at Civil War battlefields,
most preservation work occurs at the local level. Therefore, to carry out the Congressional
directive for information about activities at the battlefields, the ABPP sought input from
local battlefield managers and advocacy organizations. The ABPP distributed
questionnaires designed to gather information about the types of preservation activities
that have taken place at the battlefields since 1993. The Questionnaire is reproduced in
Appendix B.
In Pennsylvania, representatives from four organizations completed and returned the
questionnaires. Their responses, combined with the survey findings, allowed the ABPP to
create a profile of conditions and activities at Pennsylvania’s two Civil War battlefields.

6
7

16 USC 470f.
42 USC 4331-4332.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

9

Summary of Conditions of Pennsylvania’s Civil War Battlefields
Quantified Land Areas
Using Geographic Information System (GIS) software, the ABPP calculated the amount of
land historically associated with the battle (Study Area); the amount of land where forces
were engaged (Core Area); and the amount of land that may retain enough integrity to be
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and that remains to be
protected (Potential National Register boundary).
As noted above and as Table 1 illustrates, the Study Areas and Core Areas of Gettysburg
and Hanover have been established in accordance with the ABPP research and field survey
methodology. Particular attention was paid to identifying the routes of approach and
withdrawal associated with each battle, and to identifying areas of secondary action that
influenced the course or outcome of the battles.8 The Study Area and Core Area
boundaries established for each battlefield take these movements and actions into
account, recognizing the extent to which theses ancillary areas facilitate greater
understanding of the battle story. Please see the individual battlefield profiles at the end
of this report for more information about the extent of and reasons for the established
boundaries.

Table 1. Battlefield Area Statistics

  

Battlefield

   Gettysburg (PA002)
  
  
  
   Hanover (PA001)
  
  

Boundary
Type

Established

Study Area
Core Area
PotNR

2009
2009
2009

Study Area
Core Area
PotNR

2009
2009
2009

  

  

  

Acres

 

 
 
 
 
 
6,179.85
 
789.23
 
0.00
    

43,522.59
8,585.47
33,993.87

  

  

Condition Assessments
Using field survey data, the ABPP assessed the overall condition of each battlefield’s Study
Area, finding very different preservation conditions at the two Pennsylvania battlefields.
At Gettysburg, portions of the landscape have been altered, but most essential features
remain. Areas of modern intrusion – commercial, residential, and industrial development –
8

National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, which is available
at http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf, offers recommendations regarding “Selecting Defensible
Boundaries.” While this document indicates that “generally, boundaries should not be drawn to include the portion of the route
taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters,” page 13 of the guidelines also states that “a basic principle is to include
within the boundary all of the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took actions based on their
assumption of being in the presence of the enemy.” In the case of Gettysburg, the ABPP has included the extensive system of roads
used by the armies to carry out reconnaissance, engage in secondary operations, and reinforce positions. These transportation
routes directly influenced the battle’s outcome and, as such, are included as contributing features within the ABPP's Study Area. In
accordance with the methodology of this study, lands retaining integrity within the Study Area, including routes, have also been
included within the PotNR boundary.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

10

are clustered along most of the major roads leading into the town of Gettysburg. The
Route 30 east corridor has been most changed by new commercial and industrial
development. This construction has altered the landscape beyond recognition, particularly
around the Camp Letterman hospital site. From the crossing of Rock Creek east to the
Route 15 bypass interchange, development has included large multi-story hotels, retail
plazas, big box stores, and a convention center. A Pella Windows manufacturing plant is
also located in the area of a known field hospital that is within close proximity to Camp
Letterman.
Portions of the battlefield have also been destroyed by residential development. Unlike
housing built in the area 20 years ago, these new developments are not constructed
immediately adjacent to the existing roadways. Instead, they sprawl into the surrounding
farmland, diminishing the integrity of even larger portions of the landscape. In areas
along Route 34 North to the north and west of Gettysburg, residential development
detracts from the once rural approach to the battlefield. While the modern road bed
follows an alignment close to that of the historic road, development on either side of the
road has become too dense to offer any sense of the historic setting.
Similar conditions also exist along Baltimore Pike/Route 97. Like many of the axial
transportation routes leading into the town of Gettysburg, Baltimore Pike still closely
follows its 1863 alignment, retaining its historic orientation with the town and battlefield.
However, quarrying activities, along with residential and commercial land use, have
obliterated much of the surrounding landscape.

Figure 2. Sprawling development, such as the retail shopping complex pictured, has already destroyed
portions of Gettysburg battlefield. Photograph by Lisa Rupple, 2005.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

11

Despite this damage to the battlefield landscape, the ABPP determined almost 80 percent
of the Study Area survives. Within the Gettysburg National Military Park, character
defining battlefield features are well preserved. Areas of higher elevation, such as Little
Round Top, provide especially good opportunities for observers to better understand how
the Pennsylvania terrain dictated military decisions and thereby influenced the course and
outcome of battle. Since 2000, landscape rehabilitation projects within the park have
restored features such as vegetation and fencing, which provided cover and concealment
or functioned as obstruction or setting during the time of battle. These efforts have been
supported by the Gettysburg Foundation, and also included removal of non-historic
features.
In addition to areas protected within the boundaries of the national park, portions of the
battlefield included within the Gettysburg Historic District also have historic integrity.
Much of this landscape, which was farmland during the time of battle, retains its rural
character. In these agricultural areas, field hospitals with intact Civil War era farm
buildings are still present. The rolling countryside also includes several of the two-lane
country roads that served as routes of approach and egress to the town of Gettysburg
before, during, and after the battle. These routes are key to understanding the mass
movements of the armies converging on Gettysburg and why the town, the hub of so
many important regional transportation routes, became the meeting place of those
armies.
At Hanover, most of the terrain and aboveground battle features have been altered
beyond recognition during the past 150 years.9 In the early 1890s, construction of a large
high school (now used as a performing arts center and office building), destroyed the
Union artillery position, which was located on a hill north of town. The hilly terrain at Mt.
Olivet Cemetery – the location of the Confederate artillery position – has not been as
greatly altered. However, burials made since the time of the battle may have damaged
the battlefield’s archeological integrity at this location.10
Within the historic downtown, Hanover’s street grid still follows a pattern similar to its
1863 configuration and some pre-civil war buildings remain intact. Unfortunately,
viewsheds that were clear during the time of the battle have been obscured by post-Civil
War industrial buildings and housing, diminishing the sense of setting and making
interpretation of troop movements difficult.
The borough of Hanover has expanded beyond its historic limits, eliminating most of the
farmland that surrounded the town during the time of the battle. Areas that were
agricultural during the battle of Hanover have been developed. Most notably, the Forney
Farm, through which Union and Confederate cavalry fought as the Union infantry
retreated into the town, has been lost. Without any historic battlefield terrain features to
anchor interpretive efforts at this location, all that remains to commemorate the cavalry
action is a walking tour marker next to a Turkey Hill gas station.

9

The condition of archeological resources within the battlefields was not assessed. Future studies are needed to determine the
degree of archeological integrity associated with subsurface battle deposits.
10
As previously state, assessment of archeological integrity was beyond the scope of ABPP site surveys associated with the report.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

12

Table 2. Condition Summary
Condition
Land use is little changed (0)
Portions of landscape have been altered, but
most essential features remain (1)
Much of the landscape has been altered and
fragmented, leaving some essential features (0)
Landscape and terrain have been altered
beyond recognition (1)
Battlefields that were not assessed (0)

Battlefield
N/A

Gettysburg (PA002)

N/A

Hanover (PA001)
N/A

Registration
The nation’s official method for recognizing historic properties worthy of preservation is
listing in the NRHP. Registered battlefields meet national standards for documentation,
physical integrity, and demonstrable significance to the history of our nation. Federal,
state, and local agencies use information from the NRHP as a planning tool to identify and
make decisions about cultural resources. Federal and state laws, most notably Section 106
of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, require agencies to account for the
effects their projects (roads, wetland permits, quarrying, cell towers, etc.) may have on
listed and eligible historic properties, such as battlefields. Listing allows project designers
to quickly identify the battlefield and avoid or minimize impacts to the landscape.
Properties listed in the NRHP are also eligible for numerous federal and state historic
preservation grant programs. Recognition as a registered battlefield may also advance
public understanding of and appreciation for the battlefield, and may encourage advocacy
for its preservation.11
As Table 3 indicates, nearly 13,000 acres of the Gettysburg battlefield and town of
Gettysburg is already listed in the NRHP. This land includes areas registered in 1966 as
part of the Gettysburg National Military Park and areas registered in 1975 as the
Gettysburg Battlefield Historic District. The ABPP’s surveys indicated that additional lands
of more than 21,000 acres at Gettysburg may be eligible for NRHP listing. The Hanover
battlefield is not currently listed in the NRHP, and the ABPP did not find sufficient integrity
to recommend listing. Table 3 compares the number of acres already designated or listed
with the number of acres that are likely to meet the same criteria, but may not currently
be part of an existing NRHP, NHL, or NPS boundary.

11

There are three levels of federal recognition for historic properties. Congressional designations, such as national park units,
National Historic Landmarks, and listings in the National Register of Historic Places. Congress creates national park units. The
Secretary of the Interior designates National Historic Landmarks (NHL) – nationally significant historic sites – for their exceptional
value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the heritage of the United States. The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is
the nation’s official list of cultural sites significant at the national, state, or local level and worthy of preservation. Historic units of
the National Park System and NHLs are also listed in the NRHP.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

13

Table 3: Acres Registered Compared with Acres Potentially
Eligible to be Registered
PotNR
Acres

Acres
Registered

Acres
Potentially
Eligible to be
Registered

33,993.87

12,867.32

21,126.55

Hanover (PA001)

0.00

0.00

0.00

All Battlefields

33,993.87

6,084.08

21,126.55

Battlefield

Designation

Gettysburg (PA002)

NPS

Stewardship
The majority of lands associated with the Study Areas of Gettysburg and Hanover are
held in private, unprotected ownership. There is no protected land at Hanover, but
nearly 19 percent of the Gettysburg Study Area is protected through fee simple
ownership or easement. With the National Park Service owning almost 4,500 acres of land
and holding easements on almost 600 additional acres, the federal government has been a
consistent preservation presence since the creation of Gettysburg National Military Park in
1895. In recent decades, nonprofit groups have provided additional stewardship. The
Gettysburg Foundation has acquired approximately 170 acres by fee simple purchase, and
has protected more than 60 additional acres by acquiring protective easements. The
Gettysburg Battlefield Preservation Association owns 145 acres of land within the Study
Area. Finally, more than 2,800 acres of the Gettysburg battlefield have been preserved
through efforts made by the Lands Conservancy of Adams County – an organization
incorporated in 1996 to preserve the rural character of the community.

Table 4. Protective Stewardship of Intact Battlefield Land
Permanently
Protected Acres

PotNR
Acres

Unprotected, Intact
Acres Remaining

8,275.26

33,993.87

25,718.61

   Hanover (PA001)

0.00

0.00

0.00

   All Battlefields

8,275.26

33,993.87

25,718.61

Battlefield

  
   Gettysburg (PA002)

Public Access and Interpretation
In its questionnaire (see Appendix B), the ABPP asked battlefield stewards about the types
of public access and interpretation available at the battlefields. The ABPP did not collect
information about the purpose or intent of the interpretation and access, such as whether
development of wayside exhibit was for purely educational reasons, to promote heritage
tourism, or to boost local economic development.
The ABPP asked respondents to indicate the type of interpretation available at or about
the battlefield. The categories included brochures, driving tours, living history
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

14

demonstrations, maintained historic features or areas, walking tours and trails, wayside
exhibits, websites, and other specialized programs. The results indicate that, while public
interpretation efforts at Hanover have been limited to wayside signage, the National Park
Service’s management efforts at Gettysburg offer a wide variety of public interpretation
and educational opportunities. With a new Visitors Center, which opened in 2008, the
national military park offers a museum gallery with access to the conserved 1884
Gettysburg Cyclorama painting, a 20-minute educational film, lecture series, ranger-guided
“battle walks,” and a bookstore among other resources and amenities.

Figure 3. Although most of the battlefield terrain is lost, a monument and gun replicas at Mt.
Olivet Cemetery serve to commemorate the battle of Hanover. Photograph by Lisa Rupple, 2005

Local Advocacy
Nonprofit organizations play important roles in protecting historic battlefields. They step
in to preserve historic sites when public funding and management for historic preservation
are absent. When public funding is available, nonprofits serve as vital partners in publicprivate preservation efforts, acting as conduits for public funds, raising critical private
matching funds, keeping history and preservation in the public eye, and working with
landowners to find ways to protect battlefield parcels.
Unfortunately, the Hanover battlefield does not have a nonprofit group to speak for
preservation interests. At Gettysburg, however, the Gettysburg Battlefield Preservation
Association and the Gettysburg Foundation have provided invaluable leadership to
Pennsylvania’s battlefield preservation community for decades.
Since 1959, the Gettysburg Battlefield Preservation Association has served as a conduit for
transferring battlefield land from private ownership to management by the National Park
Service. In addition to land preservation activities, the Association also hosts lectures,
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

15

organizes events and publishes educational materials to promote the significance of the
Gettysburg battlefield. Similarly, in 1989, the Gettysburg Foundation launched its efforts
to fund landscape preservation, battlefield terrain rehabilitation, monument conservation,
artifact curation, and public education at the Gettysburg National Military Park.
While other organizations with more general historical interests may also play important
roles in battlefield preservation, the Gettysburg Battlefield Preservation Association and
the Gettysburg Foundation are the only known local organizations in Pennsylvania
dedicated solely to the goals of Civil War battlefield preservation, interpretation, and
promotion.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

16

Individual Battlefield Profiles
Battlefield Profile Glossary
Location

County or city in which the battlefield is located.

Campaign

Name of military campaign of which the battle was part. Campaign
names are taken from The War of the Rebellion: a Compilation of the
Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies.

Battle Date(s)

Day or days upon which the battle took place, as determined by the
Civil War Sites Advisory Commission.

Principal Commanders Ranking commanders of opposing forces during the battle.
Forces Engaged

Name or description of largest units engaged during the battle.

Results

Indicates battle victor or inconclusive outcome.

Study Area

Acres within the Study Area (see Table 2), as determined by the ABPP,
that represent the historic extent of the battle upon the landscape.

Potential National
Register Lands

Acres of land that retain historic character and may be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (see Table 2).

Protected Lands

Estimated acres (based on questionnaires and GIS) of battlefield land
set aside or placed under permanent easement since the Civil War for
the purposes of maintaining the historic character of the landscape
and for preventing future impairment or destruction of the
landscape and historic features.

Publicly Accessible
Lands

Estimated acres (based on responses to questionnaires) maintained
for public visitation.

Management Area

Name of historic site, park, or other area maintained for resource
protection and/or public visitation.

Friends Group(s)

Name of local advocacy organization(s) that support preservation
activities at/for the battlefield.

Preservation
Activities
Since 1993

Indicates which types of preservation activities have taken place at
the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses to questionnaires).

Public
Interpretation
Since 1993

Indicates which types of interpretation/educational activities have
taken place at the battlefield since 1993 (based on
responses to questionnaires).

Condition Statement

The ABPP’s assessment of the overall condition of the battlefield’s
Study Area (based on field surveys and responses to questionnaires).

Historical Designation Notes the most prestigious historical designation the battlefield has
received (i.e. national park unit, National Historic Landmark, or
National Register of Historic Places).

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

17

Gettysburg (PA002)
Location

Adams County

Campaign

Gettysburg Campaign (June-August 1863)

Battle Date(s)

July 1-3, 1863

Principal Commanders

Maj. Gen. George G. Meade [US]; Gen. Robert E. Lee [CS]

Forces Engaged

Army of the Potomac [US]; Army of Northern Virginia [CS]

Results

Union Victory

Study Area

43,522.59 acres
The Study Area was expanded to include two outlying cavalry
engagements and corresponding Core Areas. Routes of approach and
withdrawal were also added to the Study Area to provide greater
understanding of the town’s role as a transportation hub, and to illustrate
how this role resulted in the convergence of the two armies and the
outcome of the battle. Roads added to the Study Area include those used
by the armies to carry out reconnaissance, engage in secondary
operations, and reinforce positions.

Potential National
Register Lands

33,993.87 acres

Protected Lands

8,275.26 acres
National Park Service, 4,493.29 acres, fee simple
Lands Conservancy of Adams County, 2,811.00 acres, easement
National Park Service, 592.41acres, easement
Gettysburg Foundation, 172.63 acres, fee simple
Gettysburg Battlefield Preservation Association, 145.00 acres,
fee simple (with easement held by the Lands Conservancy of Adams
County)
Gettysburg Foundation, 60.93 acres, easement

Publicly Accessible Lands

4,775.94 acres
National Park Service, Gettysburg National Military Park,
4,538.31 acres
Gettysburg Battlefield Preservation Association, Daniel Lady Farm,
145.00 acres
Gettysburg Foundation, 92.63 acres

Management Area

Gettysburg National Military Park

Friends Group(s)

Gettysburg Foundation (1989)
Gettysburg Battlefield Preservation Association (1959)

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

18

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
http://www.nps.gov/gett/index.htm

Other
Audio Tour Tapes, Various Educational Programs, and Events

Condition Statement

Portions of landscape have been altered, but most essential
features remain. Areas of modern commercial, residential, and
industrial development are clustered along most of the major
roads leading into the town of Gettysburg. Despite this damage,
significant portions of the battlefield have been protected within
the boundaries of the Gettysburg National Military Park. Outside
the park boundaries, battlefield land that continues to be used for
agricultural purposes retains the rural character that typified the
region at the time of battle. This rural land is both most
vulnerable to development threats, and most valuable to
preservation interests.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Gettysburg National
Military Park, 1966)
National Register of Historic Places (Gettysburg Battlefield
Historic District, 1975)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

19

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

20

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

21

Hanover (PA001)
Location

York County

Campaign

Gettysburg Campaign (June-August 1863)

Battle Date(s)

June 30, 1863

Principal Commanders

Brig. Gen. Elon J. Farnsworth and Brig. Gen. George A. Custer [US];
Maj. Gen. J.E.B. Stuart [CS]

Forces Engaged

3rd Cavalry Division, Army of the Potomac, including
Farnsworth’s 1st Brigade and Custer’s 2nd Brigade [US]; Stuart’s
Cavalry Division, Army of Northern Virginia [CS]

Results

Inconclusive

Study Area

6,179.85 acres
The Study Area was revised to include routes of approach and withdrawal
used by Union and Confederate cavalries.

Potential National
Register Lands

0.00 acres

Protected Lands

0.00 acres

Publicly Accessible Lands

0.00 acres

Management Area

None

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
Other

Condition Statement

The landscape and terrain features have been altered beyond
recognition. Expansion of the town of Hanover has destroyed the
battlefield terrain that once existed outside the historic town
limits. Within the town of Hanover, industrial, institutional, and
residential development has compromised most of the historic

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

22

urban battlefield landscape and associated viewsheds. While
there is no potential for significant preservation at this battlefield,
commemoration would be appropriate.
Historical Designation

None

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

23

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

24

Appendices
Appendix A. Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002
Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December 2002
Amends the American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k)

An Act
To amend the American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior
to establish a battlefield acquisition grant program.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ``Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002''.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
(a) Findings.--Congress finds the following
(1) Civil War battlefields provide a means for the people of
the United States to understand a tragic period in the history
of the United States.
(2) According to the Report on the Nation's Civil War
Battlefields, prepared by the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission, and dated July 1993, of the 384 principal Civil War
battlefields-(A) almost 20 percent are lost or fragmented;
(B) 17 percent are in poor condition; and
(C) 60 percent have been lost or are in imminent
danger of being fragmented by development and lost as
coherent historic sites.
(b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-(1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect
nationally significant Civil War battlefields through
conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
(2) to create partnerships among State and local
governments, regional entities, and the private sector to
preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil War
battlefields.
SEC. 3. BATTLEFIELD ACQUISITION GRANT PROGRAM.
The American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k) is amended-(1) by redesignating subsection (d) as paragraph (3) of
subsection (c), and indenting appropriately;
(2) in paragraph (3) of subsection (c) (as redesignated by
paragraph (1))-(A) by striking ``Appropriations'' and inserting
``appropriations''; and
(B) by striking ``section'' and inserting
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

25

``subsection'';
(3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following
``(d) Battlefield Acquisition Grant Program.-``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection
``(A) Battlefield report.--The term `Battlefield
Report' means the document entitled `Report on the
Nation's Civil War Battlefields', prepared by the Civil
War Sites Advisory Commission, and dated July 1993.
``(B) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity'
means a State or local government.
``(C) Eligible site.--The term `eligible site' means
a site-``(i) that is not within the exterior
boundaries of a unit of the National Park System;
and
``(ii) that is identified in the Battlefield
Report.
``(D) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the
Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American
Battlefield Protection Program.
``(2) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a
battlefield acquisition grant program under which the Secretary
may provide grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share
of the cost of acquiring interests in eligible sites for the
preservation and protection of those eligible sites.
``(3) Nonprofit partners.--An eligible entity may acquire an
interest in an eligible site using a grant under this subsection
in partnership with a nonprofit organization.
``(4) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the total
cost of acquiring an interest in an eligible site under this
subsection shall be not less than 50 percent.
``(5) Limitation on land use.--An interest in an eligible
site acquired under this subsection shall be subject to section
6(f)(3) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16
U.S.C. 460l-8(f)(3)).
``(6) Reports.-``(A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the
date of the enactment of this subparagraph, the
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the
activities carried out under this subsection.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--Not later than
2 years after the date of the enactment of this
subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a
report that updates the Battlefield Report to reflect-``(i) preservation activities carried out at
the 384 battlefields during the period between
publication of the Battlefield Report and the
update;
``(ii) changes in the condition of the
battlefields during that period; and
``(iii) any other relevant developments
relating to the battlefields during that period.
``(7) Authorization of appropriations.-``(A) In general.--There are authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary from the Land and Water
Conservation Fund to provide grants under this
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

26

subsection $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004
through 2008.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--There are
authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry
out paragraph (6)(B), $500,000.''; and
(4) in subsection (e)-(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``as of'' and all
that follows through the period and inserting ``on
September 30, 2008.''; and
(B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and provide
battlefield acquisition grants'' after ``studies''.

-end-

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

27

Appendix B. Battlefield Questionnaire
State
Battlefield
Person Completing Form
Date of completion

I. Protected Lands of the Battlefield (“Protected lands” are these “owned” for historic
preservation or conservation purposes. Please provide information on land protected since 1993.)
1) Identify protected lands by parcel since 1993. Then answer these questions about each parcel,
following example in the chart below. What is the acreage of each parcel? Is parcel owned fee
simple, by whom? Is there is an easement, if so name easement holder? Was the land purchased or
the easement conveyed after 1993? What was cost of purchase or easement? What was source of
funding and the amount that source contributed? Choose from these possible sources: Coin money,
LWCF, Farm Bill, State Government, Local Government, Private Owner, Private Non-Profit (provide
name), or Other (describe).
Parcel

Acres Owner

Easement Year

Cost

Source

Joe Smith Farm

194

Private

SHPO

1995

$500,000

LWCF/$250,000
Private/$250,000

Sue Jones Tract

16

Battlefield Friends, Inc. No

2002

$41,000

State/$20,000
BFI/$21,000

2) Other public or non-profit lands within the battlefield? (Y/N)
•

If yes, describe

•

Name of public or non-profit owner or easement holder

•

Number of Acres owned/held

3) Is the information in a GIS? (Y/N)
If yes, may NPS obtain a copy of the data? (Y/N)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

28

II. Preservation Groups
1) Is there a formal interested entity (friends group, etc) associated with the battlefield? (Y/N)
If yes
Name
Address
Phone
Fax
E-mail
Web site? (Y/N)
If yes, what is the URL?
Does the web site have a preservation message? (Y/N)
What year did the group form?

III. Public Access and Interpretation
1) Does the site have designated Public Access? (Y/N) (Count public roads if there are designated
interpretive signs or pull-offs)
If yes, what entity provides the public access (Access may occur on lands owned in fee or under
easement to the above entities)
Federal government
State government
Local government

Private Nonprofit organization
Private owner
Other

Name of entity (if applicable)
Number of Acres Accessible to the Public (size of the area in which the public may physically visit
without trespassing. Do not include viewsheds.)

2) Does the site have interpretation? (Y/N)
If yes, what type of interpretation is available?
Visitor Center
Brochure(s)
Wayside exhibits
Driving Tour
Walking Tour

Audio tour tapes
Maintained historic features/areas
Living History
Website
Other

IV. Registration
Applies only to the battlefield landscape, not to individual contributing features of a battlefield
(i.e., the individually listed Dunker Church property of .2 acres does not represent the Antietam
battlefield for the purposes of this exercise)
1) Is the site a designated National Historic Landmark? (Y/N)
If yes, NHL and ID Number
2) Is the site listed in the National Register? (Y/N)
If yes, NRHP Name and ID Number
3) Is the site listed in the State Register? (Y/N)
If yes, State Register Name and ID Number
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

29

4) Is the site in the State Inventory? (Y/N)
If yes, State Inventory Name and ID Number
5)

Is the site designated as a local landmark or historic site? (Y/N)
Type of Designation/Listing

V. Program Activities
What types of preservation program activities have occurred at the battlefield? Provide final
product name and date if applicable (e.g., Phase I Archeological Survey Report on the Piper Farm,
1994 and Antietam Preservation Plan, 2001, etc.)
1) Research and Documentation

2) Cultural Resource surveys and inventories (building/structure and landscape inventories,
archeological surveys, landscape surveys, etc.)

3) Planning Projects (preservation plans, site management plans, cultural landscape reports, etc.)

4) Interpretation Projects (also includes education)

5) Advocacy (any project meant to engage the public in a way that would benefit the preservation
of the site, e.g. PR, lobbying, public outreach, petitioning for action, etc.)

6) Legislation (any local, state, or federal legislation designed to encourage preservation of the
battlefield individually or together with other similar sites)

7) Fundraising
a. To support program activities?
b. To support land acquisition/easements?

8) Other

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

30

Appendix C. Civil War Battlefield Land Acquisition Grants
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (PL 107-359) amended the American
Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 USC 469k) to authorize a matching grant program to
assist States and local communities in acquiring significant Civil War battlefield lands for
permanent protection. Most recently, Congress showed its continued support for these
grants through its reauthorization of this program within the Omnibus Public Land
Management Act of 2009 (PL 111-11).
Eligible battlefields are those listed in the 1993 Report on the Nation’s Civil War
Battlefields prepared by the Congressionally-chartered Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
(CWSAC). Eligible acquisition projects may be for fee interest in land or for a protective
interest such as a perpetual easement.
Since 1998, Congress has appropriated a total of $38.9 million for this Civil War Battlefield
Land Acquisition Grants (CWBLAG) Program. These grants have assisted in the permanent
protection of more than 15,550 acres at 62 Civil War battlefields in 14 states. While there
have been no CWBLAG grants awarded in Pennsylvania to date, more than 27,900 acres of
Gettysburg may be eligible for land acquisition funding from this program.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

31

Appendix D. American Battlefield Protection Program Planning Grants

Since 1992, ABPP has offered annual planning grants to nonprofit organizations, academic
institutions, and local, regional, state, and tribal governments to help protect battlefields
located on American soil. Applicants are encouraged to work with partner organizations
and federal, state, and local government agencies as early as possible to integrate their
efforts into a larger battle site protection strategy. ABPP has awarded $117,410 to
Pennsylvania’s Civil War battlefields.
Grantee

Year

Project Title

Award

Friends of the National
Parks at Gettysburg, Inc.

1997

Reevaluation and Revision of the Gettysburg
National Battlefield Historic District
Reevaluation and Revision of the Gettysburg
National Battlefield Historic District
Viewshed Analysis of Gettysburg Battlefield
Historic District
Continuation of Wayside Exhibit
Project and Economic Impact Study
Continuation of Wayside Exhibit Project
10 Wayside Exhibits Along the Historic
Pathway Linking the Park and the Town

$22,000.00

1995
1993
Main Street Gettysburg

1996
1994
1993

Total ABPP Planning Grants to Pennsylvania Battlefields as of FY2009

$23,200.00
$20,000.00
$19,390.00
$17,070.00
$15,750.00

$117,410.00

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – Commonwealth of Pennsylvania

32

