U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Far Western Battllefiiellds::
Far Western Batt ef e ds
States of Collorado,, Idaho,, and New Mexiico
States of Co orado Idaho and New Mex co
Washington, DC
July 2010

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program
Washington, DC
July 2010

Authority
The American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996, as amended by the Civil War
Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December
2002), directs the Secretary of the Interior to update the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields.

Acknowledgments
NPS Project Team Paul Hawke, Project Leader; Kathleen Madigan, Survey Coordinator;
Tanya Gossett, Paul Hawke, and January Ruck, Reporting; Matthew Borders, Historian;
Kristie Kendall, Program Assistant
Battlefield Surveyor(s) Kathleen Madigan and Matthew Borders, American Battlefield
Protection Program
Respondents Kathy Billings, Pecos National Historic Site; Jeff Hanson, Bureau of
Reclamation; Signa Larralde, Bureau of Land Management; Alden Miller, Sand Creek
Massacre National Historic Site; Brenda Wilkenson, Bureau of Land Management

Cover: The volcanic escarpment of Mesa de la Contadera, also known as Black Mesa, is
one of the primary defining features of the Valverde battlefield in New Mexico.
Photograph by Matthew Borders, 2009.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .................................................................................................... 1
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 3
SYNOPSIS........................................................................................................................ 5
METHOD STATEMENT ..................................................................................................... 8
RESEARCH AND FIELD SURVEYS ...................................................................................................... 8
QUESTIONNAIRES ....................................................................................................................... 12
SUMMARY OF CONDITIONS OF CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELDS IN THE FAR WEST ........... 13
QUANTIFIED LAND AREAS ........................................................................................................... 13
CONDITION ASSESSMENTS ........................................................................................................... 13
REGISTRATION ........................................................................................................................... 15
STEWARDSHIP ............................................................................................................................ 16
PUBLIC ACCESS AND INTERPRETATION........................................................................................... 17
LOCAL ADVOCACY ..................................................................................................................... 18
INDIVIDUAL BATTLEFIELD PROFILES ........................................................................... 19
APPENDICES ................................................................................................................. 32
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B.
APPENDIX C.
APPENDIX D.

CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD PRESERVATION ACT OF 2002............................................... 32
BATTLEFIELD QUESTIONNAIRE ................................................................................. 35
CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD LAND ACQUISITION GRANTS ................................................ 38
AMERICAN BATTLEFIELD PROTECTION PROGRAM PLANNING GRANTS .......................... 39

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

Introduction
The information in this report fulfills, in part, the purposes of the Civil War Battlefield
Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016). Those purposes are:
1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect nationally
significant Civil War battlefields through conservation easements and feesimple purchases of those battlefields from willing sellers; and
(2) to create partnerships among state and local governments, regional
entities, and the private sector to preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally
significant Civil War battlefields.
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 directs the Secretary of the Interior,
acting through the American Battlefield Protection Program of the National Park Service,
to update the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil
War Battlefields. The CWSAC was established by Congress in 1991 and published its report
in 1993. Congress provided funding for this update in FY2005 and FY2007. Congress
asked that the updated report reflect the following:
•
•
•

Preservation activities carried out at the 384 battlefields identified by the
CWSAC during the period between 1993 and the update;
Changes in the condition of the battlefields during that period; and
Any other relevant developments relating to the battlefields during that period.

In accordance with the legislation, this report presents information about Civil War
battlefields in the Far Western States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico for use by
Congress, federal, state, and local government agencies, landowners, and other interest
groups. Other state reports will be issued as surveys and analyses are completed.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

3

Figure 1. Sand
Creek Massacre
is the only
CWSAC
battlefield in
Colorado.

Figure 2. Bear
River Massacre is
the only CWSAC
battlefield in
Idaho.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

4

Figure 3.
Valverde and
Glorieta Pass are
the two CWSAC
battlefields in
New Mexico

Figure 4. Modern
road intrusions, such
as US 50/66 in the
Pigeon Ranch core
area of Glorieta
Pass, New Mexico,
are both a
preservation and
interpretive
challenge for this
battlefield.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

5

Synopsis
There are four Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC) battlefields in the Far West.
These four battlefields, in three states, are being reported on together because they
represent resources isolated by geography and military campaign (type). Together they
illustrate the preservation activities and needs of the Far West since the CWSAC initial
report in 1993. They are Sand Creek Massacre in Colorado, Bear River Massacre in
Idaho, and Valverde and Glorieta Pass in New Mexico. Historically, these battlefields
encompassed more than 84,000 acres.1 Today, large portions of the historic landscapes
associated with these battles, about 74,000 acres (88 percent), retain their historic
character.2
In 1993, the CWSAC used a four-tiered system that combined historic significance, current
condition, and level of threat to determine priorities for preservation among the
battlefields. The CWSAC ranked Glorieta Pass among the nation’s top priorities for
preservation. The rural sites of Valverde and Sand Creek Massacre were identified as
battlefields that had the potential for comprehensive landscape preservation. Bear River
Massacre was identified as a battlefield needing additional protection, the third tier of
preservation priorities. Today, all four battlefields are good candidates for landscape
preservation and protection.

Table 1: CWSAC Preservation Priorities from 1993
CWSAC Priority

Battlefield

County

I Critical Need

Glorieta Pass (NM002)

Santa Fe

II Comprehensive Preservation
Possible

Sand Creek (CO001)
Valverde (NM001)

San Miguel
Kiowa

III Additional Protection Needed

Bear River (ID001)

Franklin

IV Fragmented/Destroyed

None

In 2009, the American Battlefield Protection Program (ABPP) survey found that Glorieta
Pass still maintained much of its integrity, as the landscape has only been moderately
altered since the time of the battle. The USDA Forest Service owns more than 3,500 acres
and the National Park Service (NPS) more than 1,360 acres of the battlefield. Since 1993,
there has been steady growth towards the battlefield along the Interstate 25 corridor east
of Santa Fe, as commuters move to the more inexpensive outskirts of the city. In addition,
funneling of the major transportation routes, I-25, US 50/66, and the Burlington Northern
and Santa Fe Railroad, through the Pass and canyons associated with the battle has
created a preservation and interpretation challenge both for lands protected by the NPS
and for unprotected portions of the Study Area. The State has considered ways to
mitigate the impact of some of the roads and is exploring the possibility of rerouting
traffic on US 50/66 to avoid the battlefield. At the same time, they are also considering
widening I-25 and have been in discussions with the NPS about the affects this would have
on the landscape. Potential highway expansion, traffic use, and increasing development

1

Using GIS software, the ABPP calculated that the Study Areas for the four battlefields in the Far West represent 84,814.59 acres.
Using GIS software, the ABPP calculated that the Potential National Register Boundaries for the four battlefields in the Far West
represent 74,552.53 acres.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico
2

6

pressure make Glorieta Pass the most threatened of the four Far Western Civil War
battlefields.
The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and the State of New Mexico’s Elephant Butte
State Park protect nearly 11,000 acres of land on the Valverde battlefield. Only 148 acres
at the BLM-managed Fort Craig National Historic Site, however, are held for the purpose
of protecting and preserving the battlefield lands in perpetuity. The remainder of the
publically held land is not managed for the preservation of the battlfield landscape and
does not meet the definition of “protected” for the purposes of this report. The
additional acreage in the Study area, approximately 24,500 acres, is in private ownership.
Sand Creek Massacre and Bear River Massacre are the least threatened of the four
CWSAC Far Western battlefields. These battlefields maintain a high degree of integrity.
The greatest threats to the two landscapes are from modern use and changes in the
historic watercourses. The streams have either changed course naturally or been
channeled into canals which have altered the historic appearance of the landscape. Both
Sand Creek Massacre and Bear River Massacre battlefields are also subject to the
impacts of modern ranching and farming. Livestock grazing has damaged the soils,
allowing for erosion and potential exposure of archeological resources.

Figures 5 & 6: Salt Cedar infestation at Valverde Battlefield, New Mexico. Salt cedar is an invasive
plant that grows so thickly it can obscure battlefield features (right). The only practical removal
technique involves cutting, poisoning, and burning; all potentially harmful to the landscape (left).
In the rural settings of the western battlefields, natural elements are one of the primary threats to
the historic landscape. Photograph by Kathleen Madigan, 2009.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

7

Method Statement
Congress instructed the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American Battlefield
Protection Program (ABPP), to report on changes in the condition of the battlefields since
1993 and on “preservation activities” and “other relevant developments” carried out at
each battlefield since 1993. To fulfill those assignments, the ABPP 1) conducted site
surveys of each battlefield and 2) prepared and sent out questionnaires to battlefield
managers and advocacy organizations (see Appendix B).

Research and Field Surveys
The ABPP conducted the field assessments of these battlefields in May 2009. The surveys
entailed additional historical research, on-the-ground documentation and assessment of
site conditions, identification of impending threats to each site, and site mapping.
Surveyors used a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver to map historic features of each
battlefield and used a Geographic Information System (GIS) program to draw site
boundaries. The ABPP retains all final survey materials. Each battlefield survey file
includes a survey form (field notes, list of defining features, list of documentary sources,
and a photo log), photographs, spatial coordinates of significant features, and boundaries
described on USGS topographic maps. The surveys did not include archeological
investigations for reasons of time and expense.
Study Areas and Core Areas
The CWSAC identified a Study Area and a Core Area for each of the principal battlefields
surveyed (see Figure 7 for definitions). The CWSAC boundaries have proven invaluable as
guides to local land and resource preservation efforts at Civil War battlefields. Since 1993,
the National Park Service has refined its battlefield survey techniques, which include
research, working with site stewards, identifying and documenting lines of approach and
withdrawal used by opposing forces, and applying the concepts of military terrain analysis
to all battlefield landscapes. The ABPP’s Battlefield Survey Manual explains the field
methods employed during this study.3 The surveys also incorporate the concepts
recommended in the National Register of Historic Places’ Guidelines for Identifying,
Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, which was published in 1992
after the CWSAC completed its original assessments of the battlefields.4
Using its refined methodology, ABPP was able to validate or adjust the CWSAC’s Study
Area and Core Area boundaries to reflect more accurately the full nature and original
resources of these battlefields (see Table 2). At each of the battlefields, the refined
methodology resulted in significant increases to the sizes of the Study Area and Core Area.
It is important to note, however, that the Study Area and Core Area boundaries are based
on the review of historical source material, drawn to indicate where the battle took place,
and convey only the location of the battlefield, neither takes the current condition or
alterations to the historic landscape into consideration. For this reason, they should not be
used to define surviving portions of a battlefield that merit protection and preservation
without further evaluation.

3

American Battlefield Protection Program, “Battlefield Survey Manual,” (Washington, DC: National Park Service, revised 2007).
National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, 1992 , Revised
1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources Division).
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

4

8

Potential National Register Boundaries
To address the question of what part of
the battlefield remains reasonably intact
and warrants preservation, this study
introduced a third boundary line that was
not attempted by the CWSAC: the
Potential National Register boundary (see
Figure 7).
Looking at each Study Area, the surveyors
assigned PotNR boundaries where they
judged that the landscape retained enough
integrity to convey the significance of the
historic battle. In a few cases, the PotNR
boundary encompasses the entire Study
Area. In most cases, however, the PotNR
boundary includes less land than identified
in the full Study Area.
In assigning PotNR boundaries, the ABPP
followed National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) guidelines when identifying
and mapping areas that retain integrity
and cohesion within the Study Areas.5
However, because the ABPP focuses only
on areas of battle, the Program did not
evaluate lands adjacent to the Study Area
that may contribute to a broader historical
and chronological definition of “cultural
landscape.” Lands outside of the Study
Area associated with other historic events
and cultural practices may need to be
evaluated in preparation for a formal
nomination of the cultural landscape.
Most importantly, the PotNR boundary
does not constitute a formal
determination of eligibility by the
Keeper of the National Register of
Historic Places.6 The PotNR boundary is
designed to be used as a planning tool for
government agencies and the public. Like
the Study and Core Area boundaries, the
PotNR boundary places no restriction on
private property use.

Figure 7: Boundary Definitions
The Study Area represents the historic extent
of the battle as it unfolded across the
landscape. The Study Area contains resources
known to relate to or contribute to the battle
event: where troops maneuvered and
deployed, immediately before and after
combat, and where they fought during
combat. Historic accounts, terrain analysis,
and feature identification inform the
delineation of the Study Area boundary.
Historic setting, approaches, and natural
features that figure importantly in the battle
are defining elements. The Study Area
indicates the extent to which historic and
archeological resources associated with the
battle (areas of combat, command,
communications, logistics, medical services,
etc.) may be found and protected. Surveyors
delineated Study Area boundaries for every
battle site that was positively identified
through research and field survey, regardless
of its present integrity.
The Core Area represents the areas of direct
engagement on the battlefield. Positions
that delivered or received fire, and the space
connecting them, fall within the Core Area.
Frequently described as “hallowed ground,”
land within the Core Area is often the first to
be targeted for protection. There may be
more than one Core Area on a battlefield, but
all lie within the Study Area.
Unlike the Study and Core Area, which are
based only upon the interpretation of historic
events, the Potential National Register
(PotNR) boundary represents ABPP’s
assessment of a Study Area’s current integrity
(the surviving landscape and features that
convey the site’s historic sense of place). The
PotNR boundary may include all or some of
the Study Area, and all or some of the Core
Area. Although preparing a National Register
nomination may require further assessment of
historic integrity and more documentation
than that provided by the ABPP survey, PotNR
boundaries identify land that merits this
additional effort.

The term integrity, as defined by the NRHP,
5

For general guidance about integrity issues and National Register of Historic Places properties, see National Park Service, How to
Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, revised 1997). The survey
evaluations described above do not meet the more stringent integrity standards for National Historic Landmark designation. See
National Park Service, How to Prepare National Historic Landmark Nominations (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior,
1999), 36-37.
6
See 36 CFR 60.1- 14 for regulations about nominating a property to the National Register of Historic Places and 36 CFR 63 for
regulations concerning Determinations of Eligibility for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

9

is “the ability of a property to convey its significance.”7 While assessments of integrity are
traditionally based on seven specific attributes – location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship, feeling, and association – battlefields are unique cultural resources and
require special evaluation.“ Generally, the most important aspects of integrity for
battlefields are location, setting, feeling and association,” and the most basic test for
determining the integrity of any battlefield is to assess “whether a participant in the battle
would recognize the property as it exists today.”8
Other conditions contribute to the degree of integrity a battlefield retains:
•

the quantity and quality of surviving battle-period resources (e.g.,
buildings, roads, fence lines, military structures, and archeological
features);

•

the quantity and quality of the spatial relationships between and among
those historic resources and the landscape that connects them;

•

the extent to which current battlefield land use is similar to battle-period
land use; and

•

the extent to which a battlefield’s physical features and overall character
visually communicate an authentic sense of the sweep and setting of the
battle.

The degree to which post-war development has altered and fragmented the historic
landscape or destroyed historic features and viewsheds is critical when assessing integrity.
Changes in traditional land use over time do not generally diminish a battlefield’s
integrity. For example, landscapes that were farmland during the Civil War do not need to
be in agricultural use today to be considered eligible for listing in the NRHP so long as the
land retains its historic rural character. Similarly, natural changes in vegetation – woods
growing out of historic farm fields, for example – do not necessarily lessen the landscape’s
integrity.
Some post-battle development is expected; slight or moderate change within the
battlefield may not substantially diminish a battlefield’s integrity. A limited degree of
residential, commercial, or industrial development is acceptable. These post-battle “noncontributing” elements are often included in the PotNR boundary in accordance with
NRHP guidelines.9
Significant changes in land use since the Civil War do diminish the integrity of the
battlefield landscape. Heavy residential, commercial, and industrial development; cellular
tower and wind turbine installation; and large highway construction are common

7

National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992, Revised 1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources
Division), http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf. Archeological integrity was not examined during this
study, but should be considered in future battlefield studies and formal nominations to the National Register of Historic Places.
8
National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992, Revised 1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources
Division).
9
The ABPP looks only at the battle-related elements of a cultural landscape. Post-battle elements, while not contributing to the
significance of the battlefield, may be eligible for separate listing in the National Register of Historic Places on their own merits.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

10

examples of such changes. Battlefield landscapes with these types of changes are
generally considered as having little or no integrity.
The PotNR boundaries therefore indicate which battlefields are likely eligible for future
listing in the NRHP and likely deserving of future preservation efforts. If a surveyor
determined that a battlefield was entirely compromised by land use incompatible with the
preservation of historic features (i.e., it has little or no integrity), the ABPP did not assign a
PotNR boundary.10
In cases where a battlefield is already listed in the NRHP, surveyors reassessed the existing
documentation based on current scholarship and resource integrity, and, when
appropriate, provided new information and proposed new boundaries as part of the
surveys. As a result, some PotNR boundaries will contain or share a boundary with lands
already listed in the NRHP. In other cases, PotNR boundaries will exclude listed lands that
have lost integrity (see Table 4.)11
The data from which all three boundaries are drawn do not necessarily reflect the full
research needed for a formal NRHP nomination. PotNR boundaries are based on an
assessment of aboveground historic features associated with the cultural and natural
landscape. The surveys did not include a professional archeological inventory or
assessment of subsurface features or indications. In some cases, future archeological
testing will help determine whether subsurface features remain, whether subsurface battle
features convey important information about a battle or historic property, and whether
that information may help to confirm, refine, or refute the boundaries previously
determined by historic studies and terrain analysis.
The ABPP survey information should be reassessed during future compliance processes
such as the Section 106 process required by the National Historic Preservation Act 12 and
Environmental Impact Statements/Environmental Assessments required by the National
Environmental Policy Act.13 Likewise, more detailed research and assessments should take
place when any battlefield is formally nominated to the NRHP or proposed for designation
as a National Historic Landmark (NHL). New research and intensive-level surveys of these
sites will enlighten future preservation and compliance work. Agencies should continue to
consult local and state experts for up-to-date information about these battlefields.
Portions of the Glorieta Pass and Bear River Massacre battlefields have been
designated as NHLs and a large portion of Sand Creek is listed in the NRHP (see Table 4).
The ABPP has identified PotNR boundaries that could guide efforts to expand existing NHL
and NRHP boundaries at these battlefields. At Valverde, the 148 acre Fort Craig National
Historic Site is listed in the NRHP, however, no known efforts have been undertaken to list
Valverde’s additional 35,284 acres as a battlefield landscape.

10

National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992 , Revised 1999 (http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf), offers recommendations
regarding "Selecting Defensible Boundaries." While this document indicates that "generally, boundaries should not be drawn to
include the portion of the route taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters," the Guidelines also state that "a basic
principle is to include within the boundary all of the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took
actions based on their assumption of being in the presence of the enemy." The ABPP interprets this latter guidance to mean all
military activities that influenced the battle. See the individual battlefield profiles for information about military actions taken along
the routes included. In accordance with the methodology of this study, if routes included in the Study Area retain integrity, they are
included within the Potential National Register boundary for the battlefield landscape.
11
The ABPP’s surveys and PotNR assessments do not constitute formal action on behalf of the office of the National Register of
Historic Places. PotNR assessments are intended for planning purposes only; they do not carry the authority to add, change, or
remove an official listing.
12
16 USC 470f.
13
42 USC 4331-4332.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

11

Questionnaires
While the ABPP maintains data about its own program activities at Civil War battlefields,
most preservation work occurs at the local level. Therefore, to carry out the Congressional
directive for information about activities at the battlefields, the ABPP sought input from
local battlefield managers and advocacy organizations. The ABPP distributed
questionnaires designed to gather information about the types of preservation activities
that have taken place at the battlefields since 1993. The Questionnaire is reproduced in
Appendix B.
In Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico, representatives from five organizations completed
and returned the questionnaires. Their responses, combined with the survey findings,
allowed the ABPP to create a profile of conditions and activities at the four Civil War
battlefields in the Far West.
Figure 8. Remains of
the curtain wall at
Bent’s New Fort, the
point from which US
troop left for Sand
Creek, Colorado.
The site of the fort is
privately owned.
Matthew Borders,
2009.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

12

Summary of Conditions of Civil War Battlefields in the Far West
Quantified Land Areas
Using Geographic Information Systems software, the ABPP calculated the amount of land
historically associated with the battle (Study Area), the amount of land where forces were
engaged (Core Area), and the amount of land that may retain enough integrity to be
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and that remains to be
protected (Potential National Register boundary).
As noted above and as Table 2 illustrates, the Study Areas and Core Areas of the Civil War
battlefields in Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico have been established in accordance with
ABPP research and field survey methodology. Particular attention was paid to identifying
the routes of approach and withdrawal associated with each battle, and to identifying
areas of secondary action that influenced the course or outcome of the battles.14 The
Study Area and Core Area boundaries established for each battlefield take these
movements and actions into account, recognizing the extent to which theses ancillary
areas serve as battlefield features.
Please see the individual battlefield profiles for more information about the extent of and
reasons for the established boundaries.

Table 2. Battlefield Area Statistics
Battlefield

Study Area

Sand Creek (CO001)
Bear River (ID001)
Valverde (NM001)
Glorieta Pass (NM002)

34,387.61
2,000.00
35,432.92
12,994.06

Core Area
2,271.97
448.48
6,888.07
992.36

PotNR Boundary
27,027.45
2,000.00
32,922.45
12,602.63

Condition Assessments
Using field survey data, the ABPP assessed the overall condition of each battlefield’s Study
Area. While no battlefield remains completely unaltered since the Civil War, all four of the
CWSAC battlefields in the Far West have suffered little alteration to their characterdefining features. These battlefields are open rural landscapes used primarily for ranching
and farming. The National Park Service protects portions of two of the battlefields, Sand
Creek Massacre and Glorieta Pass. Threats such as looting, natural elements, and
incompatible use, however, may limit the protection of historic resources on other federal,
state, and privately owned land at all four battlefields.
Natural processes of stream erosion, river course changes, invasive plant infestation, and
archeological looting affect all four Far Western battlefields. To date, the threats have not

14

National Register of Historic Places Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America's Historic Battlefields
(http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf), offers recommendations regarding "Selecting Defensible
Boundaries." While this document indicates that "generally, boundaries should not be drawn to include the portion of the route
taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters," the Guidelines also state that "a basic principle is to include within the
boundary all of the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took actions based on their assumption
of being in the presence of the enemy." The ABPP interprets this latter guidance to mean all military activities that influenced the
battle. See the individual battlefield profiles for information about military actions taken along the routes included. In accordance
with the methodology of this study, if routes included in the Study Area retain integrity, they are included within the Potential
National Register boundary for the battlefield landscape.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

13

seriously compromised the integrity of the battlefields. Nevertheless, if left unchecked,
these threats will lead to degradation of the battlefield landscape.
The landscape at Sand Creek Massacre is in good condition with only limited intrusions
since the 1864 massacre. The greatest threat to the site is erosion caused by wind and
water, particularly along the ridgeline and sandpits on which US troops stood and the
Cheyenne and Arapaho attempted to hide themselves from attack. This natural erosion is
exacerbated by cattle grazing on lands near the old Sand Creek bed and massacre site. An
historic dike, which has since been abandoned, has caused some damage to the landscape
in the northern portion of the battlefield and there are several ranch roads that were not
present at the time of the massacre. Because the landscape as a whole is so little changed
since the period of significance, the battlefield retains a high level of integrity.
Bear River Massacre site retains a high degree of integrity. The wide-open vista, rising
heights, and most of the historic defining features of the battlefield are easy to interpret.
With the exception of limited intursions, the landscape has changed little since the time of
the massacre. In 1898 the West Cache Canal was dug along the massacre site and
Shoshone encampment, rebuilt after a flood in 1911, and is still in use today. Several
landslides in the canyon on the northwest side of the Study Area have covered the
massacre site and U.S. Route 91 bisects the battlefield. The majority of the Bear River
Massacre landscape is in private land holdings, most of which are either ranches or
residences. The Shoshone Nation also owns a portion of the battlefield, which it uses for
both interpretation and memorial purposes.
The Valverde battlefield on both sides of the Rio Grande is in private and public
ownership. While portions of the battlefield landscape have been altered, most essential
features remain and the majority of the Study Area retains good integrity. The landscape
is very rural and isolated, but its topography in the northern section has been impacted by
both environmental changes and land use. The exact position of the Valverde fords,
around which the bulk of the fighting occurred, cannot be located at this time. Shifting of
the Rio Grande over the past 146 years has caused more than twenty feet of silt to settle in
the area where the fords are believed to have been located. This, along with a dense
growth of invasive salt cedar trees, has altered the battlefield landscape. The Burlington
Northern and Santa Fe railroad and several Bureau of Reclamation canals further affect
the northern portion of the Study Area. The site of Fort Craig, approximately five miles
south of the fords’ approximate locations, is managed by the Bureau of Land Management
as a National Historic Site. Currently Valverde is the only one of the four Far Western
battlefields not listed in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). A comprehensive
preservation plan to include listing in the NRHP and accommodation of future land use by
privately owned ranches and government agencies should be the focus of preservation
efforts to preserve this important landscape.
Currently, the condition of the Glorieta Pass battlefield is good. While portions of the
battlefield landscape have been altered, most essential features remain. Pecos National
Historical Park protects portions of the battlefield, as does the USDA Forest Service. The
remaining lands are privately owned. Glorietta Pass and the canyon in the
Cañoncito/Johnson’s Ranch area have been impacted by the construction of Interstate 25,
which is currently under consideration for widening. The Apache Creek area has been
slightly altered by the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe railroad whose berm has covered
part of the original battle site, and the Pigeon Ranch area is being affected by increasing
traffic use on US 50/66. There has also been steady growth towards the battlefield along
the Interstate 25 corridor east of Santa Fe, as commuters move to the more inexpensive
outskirts of the city. Potential highway expansion, traffic use, and increasing development
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

14

pressure, particularly through the two Core Areas, make Glorieta Pass the most
threatened of the four Far Western Civil War battlefields. Opportunities exist for public
and private preservation partnerships to counter these threats and should be the focus of
future preservation efforts.

Table 3: Condition Summary
Condition

Battlefield

Land use is little Changed (3)

Sand Creek (CO001)
Bear River (ID001)

Portions of landscape have been altered, but most
essential features remain (1)

Glorieta Pass (NM002)
Valverde (NM001)

Much of the landscape has been altered and
fragmented, leaving some essential features (0)

None

Landscape and terrain have been altered beyond
recognition (0)

None

Battlefields that were not assessed

None

Registration
The nation’s official method for recognizing historic properties worthy of preservation is
listing in the NRHP. Registered battlefields meet national standards for documentation,
physical integrity, and demonstrable significance to the history of our nation. Federal,
state, and local agencies use information from the NRHP as a planning tool to identify and
make decisions about cultural resources. Federal and state laws, most notably Section 106
of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, require agencies to account for the
effects their projects (roads, wetland permits, quarrying, cell towers, etc.) may have on
listed and eligible historic properties, such as battlefields. Listing allows project designers
to quickly identify the battlefield and avoid or minimize impacts to the landscape.
Properties listed in the NRHP are also eligible for numerous federal and state historic
preservation grant programs. Recognition as a registered battlefield may also advance
public understanding of and appreciation for the battlefield, and may encourage advocacy
for its preservation.15
Lands within the Bear River and Glorieta Pass battlefield Study Areas have already been
listed in the NRHP and further honored with designation as National Historic Landmarks
(NHLs). Sand Creek is listed in the NRHP. Within Valverde battlefield, Fort Craig and its
surrounding landscape is listed in the NRHP. Table 4 compares the number of acres
already registered (listed) with the number of acres that are likely to meet the same
criteria, but are not currently part of an existing NHL or NRHP boundary. Given the good
integrity of these battlefields, the ABPP believes there exists an excellent opportunity to
expand the boundaries of the three previously listed battlefields and to list the battlefield
landscape at Valverde.

15

There are three levels of federal recognition for historic properties: Congressional designations such as national park units,
National Historic Landmarks, and listings in the National Register of Historic Places. Congress creates national park units. The
Secretary of the Interior designates National Historic Landmarks (NHL) – nationally significant historic sites – for their exceptional
value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the heritage of the United States. The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is
the nation’s official list of cultural sites significant at the national, state, or local level and worthy of preservation. Historic units of
the National Park System and NHLs are also listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

15

Table 4. Acres Registered Compared with Acres Potentially
Eligible to be Registered
Designation

Sand Creek (CO001)
Bear River (ID001)
Glorieta Pass (NM002)
Valverde (NM001)
Totals

NRHP & NPS
NHL
NHL & NPS
NRHP*

ABPP
PotNR
Acres

Existing
Registered
Acres

Acres Potentially
Eligible to be
Registerted

27,027.45
2,000.00
12,602.63
32,922.45

7,360.16
1,791.06
1,627.35
148.72

19,667.29
208.94
10,975.28
32,773.73

74,552.53

Battlefield

10,927.29

63,625.24

* The NRHP designation for Valverde is for Fort Craig, a battlefield-defining feature, and not for the
battlefield landscape.

Stewardship
For the purposes of this update, public lands managed as historic sites in order to preserve
the battlefield resources are considered protected. Other public land, not managed for the
preservation of the battlefield landscape, still has potential for damaging threats. The
land is subject to state and federal preservation law, preventing private development, but
its primary use may not be compatible with preservation of the battlefield landscape. It
may also be threatened by natural processes.
At the Far Western battlefields, a total of 3,927 acres (five percent of the total Study
Areas) are preserved and protected as battlefield landscapes. The remaining 95% of the
battlefields are in either private unprotected ownership or managed by state and federal
agencies for purposes other than battlefield preservation.
The National Park Service owns land at both Sand Creek Massacre and Glorieta Pass,
providing protective ownership for a portion of these battlefields. At Sand Creek
Massacre, the NPS holds 2,385 acres (seven percent of the Study Area) as the Sand Creek
Massacre National Historic Site and 1,364 acres of Glorieta Pass (10% of the Study Area)
as part of Pecos National Historical Site. The Bureau of Land Management manages 148
acres at Valverde (less than 1% of the Study Area) as Fort Craig National Historic Site. At
Bear River Massacre, the Shoshone Tribe owns 26 acres (one percent of the Study Area)
for the purpose of interpretation and memorialization.
Two of the battlefields also contain other public lands not managed for the preservation
of the battlefield landscape, but still providing a level of protection. At Glorieta Pass,
more than 3,500 acres are owned by the USDA Forest Service as part of the Santa Fe
National Forest and The State of Colorado manages approximately 3 acres at Queen’s State
Wildlife Area. At Valverde, the Bureau of Land Management owns 1,575 acres and the
State of New Mexico manages more than 9,345 acres at Elephant Butte Lake State Park.
Each of the Far Western battlefields could benefit from comprehensive planning to help
guide coordination among public owners, private non-profits, and private landowners.
Because so much of the battlefield landscape is in good condition there exists an excellent
opportunity for additional preservation measures such as land acquisition, fee simple
ownership, or easement purchases. Easements in particular provide protection without
burdening the holder with obligations associated with fee simple ownership while
compensating owners who relinquish the development rights of their property with tax
incentives.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

16

Table 5. Protective Stewardship of Intact Battlefield Land*
ABPP PotNR
Acres

  
  
  
  
  

Sand Creek (CO001)
Valverde (NM001)
Glorieta Pass (NM002)
Bear River (ID001)

Permanently
Protected Acres

27,027.45
32,922.45
12,602.63
2,000.00

Battlefield

2,388.62
148.72
1,363.85
26.00

  Totals
74,552.53
   * For details, see each site's Individual Battlefield Profile

3,927.19

Unprotected,
Intact Acres
Remaining
24,638.83
32,774.45
11,238.63
1,974.00

 
 
 
 

70,625.91  
  

Public Access and Interpretation
In its questionnaire, the ABPP asked battlefield stewards about the types of public access
and interpretation available at each battlefield. The ABPP did not collect information
about the purpose or intent of the interpretation and access, such as whether a wayside
exhibit was developed for purely educational reasons, to promote heritage tourism, or
boost local economic development.
The ABPP asked respondents to indicate the type of interpretation available at or about
the battlefield. The categories included brochures, driving tours, living history
demonstrations, maintained historic features or areas, walking tours and trails, wayside
exhibits, websites, and other specialized programs. The results indicate that all of the Far
Western battlefields offer some degree of public access and interpretation. Bear River
Massacre site has both a pull off with an historic monument and signs and an overlook
with interpretive panels. At Glorieta Pass, and Valverde, NPS and BLM provide visitors
centers, walking trails, brochures, and interpretive signs.
There is currently limited interpretation at Sand Creek Massacre as the National Park
Service has only recently acquired lands associated with this site. At this time, there is a
small visitors center, several interpretive signs, an historic monument, and a short walking
trail. There is also a repatriation plot that allows American Indian remains to be placed
back in earth sacred to the Cheyenne and Arapaho.
Additional details regarding the interpretation activities undertaken at the four
battlefields can be found in the Individual Battlefield Profiles section of this report.

Table 6. Interpretation Summary*
On-site Interpretation

Battlefield

Battlefields with public interpretation,
including visitors center (3)

Sand Creek (CO001), Valverde (NM001),
Glorieta Pass (NM002)

Battlefields with public interpretation, but no
visitors center (1)

Bear Creek (ID001)

Battlefields with no public interpretation (0)
*For details, see each site's Individual Battlefield Profile.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

17

Local Advocacy
Nonprofit organizations play important roles in protecting historic battlefields. These
organizations step in to preserve historic sites when public funding and management for
historic preservation are absent. When public funding is available, nonprofits serve as vital
partners in public-private preservation efforts, acting as conduits for public funds, raising
critical private matching funds, keeping history and preservation in the public eye, and
working with landowners to find ways to protect battlefield parcels. There are no local
advocacy groups dedicated solely to preserving the four battlefields in the Far West.
Glorieta Pass is part of Pecos National Historical Park and as such enjoys the support of
the park’s friends group, Friends of Pecos National Historical Park. The friends group was
established to support the operations and interpretive themes of the Park prior to the
designation of Glorieta Pass as part of the park. With the designation, the existing
friends group became a nonprofit advocate for Glorieta Pass.
Sand Creek Massacre, also a unit of the National Park Service, does not have a specific
friends group, however, the statewide Colorado Preservation, Inc., serves as an advocate
for the battlefield. Bear River Massacre and Valverde have no known advocacy
groups.

Figure 9. Interpretive sign near the site of the Indian encampments on the Bear River Massacre
battlefield in Idaho. Kathleen Madigan, 2009.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

18

Individual Battlefield Profiles
Battlefield Profile Glossary
Location

County or city in which the battlefield is located.

Campaign

Name of military campaign of which the battle was part. Campaign
names are taken from The War of the Rebellion: a Compilation of
the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies.

Battle Date(s)

Day or days upon which the battle took place, as determined by the
Civil War Sites Advisory Commission.

Principal Commanders Ranking commanders of opposing forces during the battle.
Forces Engaged
Results

Name or description of largest units engaged during the battle.
Indicates battle victor or inconclusive outcome.

Study Area

Acreage determined by the ABPP to represent the full extent of land
associated with the historic battle.

Potential National
Register Lands

Acreage of land that retains historic character and may be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (see Table 2).

Protected Lands

Estimated acreage (based on questionnaires and GIS) of battlefield
land that is in public or private non-profit ownership, or is under
permanent protective easement, and is managed specifically for 1)
the purposes of maintaining the historic character of the landscape
and for preventing future impairment or destruction of the landscape
and historic features, or for 2) a conservation purpose and use
compatible with the goals of historic landscape preservation.

Publicly Accessible
Lands

Estimated acreage (based on responses to questionnaires)
within the Study Area maintained for public visitation.

Management Area

Name of historic site, park, or other area maintained for battlefield
resource protection and/or public visitation.

Friends Group(s)

Name of local advocacy organization(s) that support preservation
activities at/for the battlefield.

Preservation
Activities
Since 1993

Indicates which types of preservation activities have taken place at
the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses to questionnaires).

Public
Interpretation
Since 1993

Indicates which types of interpretation/educational activities have
taken place at the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses
to questionnaires).

Condition Statement The ABPP’s assessment of the overall condition of the battlefield’s
Study Area (based on field surveys and responses to questionnaires).
Historical Designation

Notes the most prestigious federal historical designation the
battlefield has received (i.e. national park unit, National Historic
Landmark, or National Register of Historic Places).

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

19

Sand Creek Massacre (CO001)
Location

Kiowa County

Campaign

Sand Creek Campaign (1864)

Battle Date(s)

November 29-30, 1864

Principal Commanders

Colonel John Chivington [US]; Chief Black Kettle, Cheyenne; Chief
Left Hand, Arapaho[I]

Forces Engaged

Chivington’s Brigade (approximately 700 men) [US]; 500 Cheyenne
and a few Arapaho (mostly women and children) [I]

Results

Union victory (massacre)

Study Area

34,387.61 acres
The Study Area shows the dual approach route used by Chivington's
forces from Bent's New Fort up to Sand Creek. The western route,
used by the military column, relates directly to the initiation of the
action and the movements over the broken ground used to get
above the Indian camps and avoid detection for the surprise assault
on the morning of the 29th. The eastern route, used by the slower
moving supply train, was added because the supply train location
was an important factor in determining the extent of the assault
and the ability of the Colorado soldiers to chase the fleeing Indians.
The location of the Indian camps, the massacre site, and Indian pony
herd areas are also included. The Core Area is drawn to include the
primary massacre site at the creek and areas in which the Third
Colorado used artillery.

Potential National
Register Lands

27,027.45 acres

Protected Lands

2,388.62 acres
National Park Service, 2,385.43 acres, fee simple
State of Colorado, 3.19 acres, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

2,388.62 acres
Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site, National Park Service,
2,385.43 acres
Queen’s State Wildlife Area, State of Colorado, 3.19 acres

Management Area(s)

Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site
Queen’s State Wildlife Area

Friends Group(s)

Colorado Preservation Inc.

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

20

Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
http://www.nps.gov/sand/

Other
Condition Statement

Land use is little changed since the period of significance. The
Sand Creek Massacre battlefield is in good condition with only
limited intrusions since the time of the massacre. The greatest
threat to the site is erosion caused by wind and water, particularly
along the ridgeline and sandpits on which US troops stood and
the Cheyenne and Arapaho attempted to hide themselves from
attack. This natural erosion is exacerbated by cattle grazing on
lands near the old Sand Creek bed and massacre site. An historic
dike, which has since been abandoned, has caused some damage
to the landscape in the northern portion of the battlefield and
there are several ranch roads that were not present at the time of
the massacre. The cottonwoods along the old creek bed, though
not historic to the landscape of 1864, make it easier to determine
the path of the original creek. There is also a repatriation plot
that allows American Indian remains and artifacts from the
massacre to be interred in earth sacred to the Cheyenne and
Arapaho.
The battlefield landscape is in excellent condition; however, there
is currently only limited interpretation at the Sand Creek Massacre
site. The National Park Service has only recently acquired lands
associated with the massacre and is beginning to increase
interpretation at the battlefield.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Sand Creek Massacre National
Historic Site, 2001)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

21

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

22

Bear River Massacre (ID001)
Location

Franklin County

Campaign

Expedition from Camp Douglas, Utah Territory, to Cache Valley,
Idaho Territory (1863)

Battle Date(s)

January 29, 1863

Principal Commanders

Colonel Patrick Edward Connor [US]; Chief Bear Hunter [I]

Forces Engaged

District of Utah [US]; Shoshone Indians [I]

Results

Union Victory (massacre)

Study Area

2,000.00 acres
The Study Area takes in the entire extent of the battlefield
including the Federal ridge where the American Indian camp was
first spotted by US Cavalry, the Federal flank attack to the
northeast, the Shoshone village, and the canyon where the
massacre took place and over which the survivors fled until no
longer pursued by US soldiers.

Potential National
Register Lands

2,000.00 acres

Protected Lands

26.00 acres
Shoshone Indian Tribe, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

26.00 acres
Shoshone Indian Tribe, fee simple

Management Area(s)

None

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
Other

Condition Statement

Land use is little changed since the period of significance. Overall,
the Bear River Massacre site is in very good condition. The wideopen vistas and rising heights are easy to see as are most of the

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

23

battlefield’s historic defining features, such as the fords over Bear
River, the ridgeline, the village sites, and the canyon. With the
exception of limited intursions, the landscape has changed little
since the time of the massacre. In 1898 the West Cache Canal was
dug along the massacre site and Shoshone encampment, was
rebuilt after a flood in 1911, and is still in use today. Several
landslides in the canyon on the northwest side of the Study Area
have covered the massacre site and U.S. Route 91 bisects the
battlefield.
The Shoshone Tribe uses the heights to the northeast as an
overlook for its interpretation of the fighting and the massacre
that ensued. There is a Daughters of Utah Pioneers monument on
the field near the site of the historic Indian village s. This pull-off
has become a location for Shoshone offerings to their ancestors.
Other interpretation of the site is limited as the majority of the
battlefield is in private ownership.
Comprehensive preservation planning could help maintain the
rural battlefield landscape while accommodating future land use
by privately owned ranches and farms. This could reduce the
threat of agricultural modernization, which would alter the
landscape.
Historical Designation

National Historic Landmark (Bear River Massacre Site, 1990)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

24

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

25

Valverde (NM001)
Location

Socorro County

Campaign

Sibley’s New Mexico Campaign (1862)

Battle Date(s)

February 20 - 21, 1862

Principal Commanders

Colonel Edward R. S. Canby [US]; Brigadier General Henry H. Sibley
and Colonel Thomas Green [CS]

Forces Engaged

Department of New Mexico (combination of regular and
volunteer units) [US]; Army of New Mexico [CS]

Results

Confederate Victory

Study Area

35,432.92 acres
The Core Area from the 1993 CWSAC study was the actual Valverde
crossing on the Rio Grande and the area of the hardest fighting.
This Core Area has been adjusted to take in the sand hills and the
foot of Black Mesa, both of which were used by the Confederates
for cover. Two additional Core Areas were added to Valverde’s
Study Area. The first is south of Fort Craig. This Core Area takes
into account the Union and Confederate armies’ skirmishing and
artillery exchange. The second Core Area is across the Rio Grande
and just south of the Black Mesa, which takes into account the
Union attack on the Confederate camp the night of the 20th and
the fighting that resumed there on the 21st.

Potential National
Register Lands

32,922.45 acres

Protected Lands

148.72 acres
Bureau of Land Management (Fort Craig National Historic Site),
fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

9,493.79 acres
Bureau of Land Management (Fort Craig National Historic Site),
148.72 acres
Elephant Butte State Park, 9,345.07 acres

Management Area(s)

Bureau of Land Management
Elephant Butte State Park

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Fort Craig National Historic Site

Driving Tour
Living History
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

26

Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Fort Craig National Historic Site

Visitor Center
Fort Craig National Historic Site

Walking Tour/Trails
Fort Craig National Historic Site

Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website: (Fort Craig National Historic Site)
http://www.blm.gov/nm/st/en/prog/recreation/socorro/fort_craig.html

Other
Condition Statement

Portions of the landscape have been altered, but most essential
features remain. The Valverde battlefield landscape is very rural
and isolated, but its topography in the northern section has been
impacted by both environmental changes and land use. The exact
position of the Valverde Fords, around which the major portion of
fighting occurred, cannot be located at this time. Shifting of the
Rio Grande over the past 146 years has caused more than twenty
feet of silt to settle in the area where the fords are believed to
have been located. This, along with a dense growth of invasive
salt cedar trees, has altered the battlefield landscape. Salt cedar is
a very invasive plant that grows so thickly it can obscure
battlefield-defining features. The only practical removal
technique involves cutting, poisoning, and burning; all potentially
harmful to the surrounding landscape. The Burlington Northern
and Santa Fe railroad and several Bureau of Reclamation canals
further affect the northern portion of the Study Area. The site of
Fort Craig, approximately five miles south of the supposed ford
locations, is managed by the Bureau of Land Management as a
National Historic Site. Portions of the fort are intact and its
associated landscape retains excellent integrity. The majority of
the battlefield on both sides of the Rio Grande is in private
unprotected ownership and retains a high level of integrity.
Valverde is the only one of the four Far Western battlefields not
listed in the National Register of Historic Places. Listing of the
landscape as a Civil War battlefield would provide recognition for
this important site. In addition, comprehensive preservation
planning could help maintain the rural battlefield landscape while
accommodating future land use by privately owned ranches.

Historical Designation

While Valverde battlefield is not listed in the National Register of
Historic Places, Fort Craig is listed both for the fort and for its
association with the battle. National Register of Historic Places
(Fort Craig, 1970)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

27

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

28

Glorieta Pass (NM002)
Location

Santa Fe County; San Miguel County

Campaign

Sibley’s New Mexico Campaign (1862)

Battle Date(s)

March 26-28, 1862

Principal Commanders

Major John C. Chivington and Colonel John P. Slough [US]; Major
Charles L. Pyron and Lieutenant Colonel William R. Scurry [CS]

Forces Engaged

Northern Division, Army of New Mexico [US]; Army of New Mexico
[CS]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

12,994.06 acres
The 1993 CWSAC Study Area was expanded to incorporate the
Confederate advance from the south and the Federal advance from
and retreat to the east. Additionally the study area was reduced
around the region of Chivington's flanking movement to reflect
better the actual terrain. The Core Areas were expanded in Apache
Canyon to include the running fight as well as Chivington's attack
near Canyoncito. The Core Areas were all adjusted to include the
complex terrain and to reflect the actual fighting in the canyons.

Potential National
Register Lands

12,602.63 acres

Protected Lands

1,363.85 acres
National Park Service, Pecos National Historic Site, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

4,881.87 acres
National Park Service, Pecos National Historic Site, 1363.85 acres
USDA Forest Service, Santa Fe National Forrest, 3,518.02 acres

Management Area(s)

Pecos National Historic Site, National Park Service
Santa Fe National Forrest, USDA Forest Service

Friends Group(s)

Friends of Pecos NHP

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

29

Website:
http://www.nps.gov/peco/

Other
Condition Statement

Portions of the Glorieta Pass battlefield landscape have been
altered, but most essential features remain. Currently, the
condition of the Glorieta Pass battlefield is good. Pecos National
Historical Park protects portions of the battlefield. The remaining
landscape is managed either by the USDA Forest Service or is in
private ownership. Since the time of the battle, Glorietta Pass and
the canyon in the Cañoncito/Johnson’s Ranch area have been
impacted by the construction of Interstate 25. The Apache Creek
area has been slightly altered by the Burlington Northern and
Santa Fe railroad whose berm has covered part of the original
battle site, and the Pigeon Ranch area is being affected by
increasing traffic use on US 50/66. There has also been steady
growth towards the battlefield along the Interstate 25 corridor
east of Santa Fe, as commuters move to the more inexpensive
outskirts of the city. The State of New Mexico has considered
ways to mitigate the impact of some of the roads through the
battlefield and is exploring the possibility of rerouting traffic on
US 50/66 to avoid the Pigeon Ranch area. At the same time, they
are also considering widening I-25 and have been in discussions
with the NPS about the affect this would have on the battlefield
landscape.
While potential highway expansion, traffic use, and increasing
development pressure make Glorieta Pass the most threatened of
the four battlefields, opportunities exist for public and private
preservation partnerships to counter these threats and preserve
the integrity of the landscape.

Historical Designation

National Historic Landmark (Glorieta Pass Battlefield, 1961)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

30

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

31

Appendices
Appendix A. Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002
Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December 2002
Amends the American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k)

An Act
To amend the American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior
to establish a battlefield acquisition grant program.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ``Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002''.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
(a) Findings.--Congress finds the following
(1) Civil War battlefields provide a means for the people of
the United States to understand a tragic period in the history
of the United States.
(2) According to the Report on the Nation's Civil War
Battlefields, prepared by the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission, and dated July 1993, of the 384 principal Civil War
battlefields-(A) almost 20 percent are lost or fragmented;
(B) 17 percent are in poor condition; and
(C) 60 percent have been lost or are in imminent
danger of being fragmented by development and lost as
coherent historic sites.
(b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-(1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect
nationally significant Civil War battlefields through
conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
(2) to create partnerships among State and local
governments, regional entities, and the private sector to
preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil War
battlefields.
SEC. 3. BATTLEFIELD ACQUISITION GRANT PROGRAM.
The American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k) is amended-(1) by redesignating subsection (d) as paragraph (3) of
subsection (c), and indenting appropriately;
(2) in paragraph (3) of subsection (c) (as redesignated by
paragraph (1))-(A) by striking ``Appropriations'' and inserting
``appropriations''; and
(B) by striking ``section'' and inserting
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

32

``subsection'';
(3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following
``(d) Battlefield Acquisition Grant Program.-``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection
``(A) Battlefield report.--The term `Battlefield
Report' means the document entitled `Report on the
Nation's Civil War Battlefields', prepared by the Civil
War Sites Advisory Commission, and dated July 1993.
``(B) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity'
means a State or local government.
``(C) Eligible site.--The term `eligible site' means
a site-``(i) that is not within the exterior
boundaries of a unit of the National Park System;
and
``(ii) that is identified in the Battlefield
Report.
``(D) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the
Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American
Battlefield Protection Program.
``(2) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a
battlefield acquisition grant program under which the Secretary
may provide grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share
of the cost of acquiring interests in eligible sites for the
preservation and protection of those eligible sites.
``(3) Nonprofit partners.--An eligible entity may acquire an
interest in an eligible site using a grant under this subsection
in partnership with a nonprofit organization.
``(4) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the total
cost of acquiring an interest in an eligible site under this
subsection shall be not less than 50 percent.
``(5) Limitation on land use.--An interest in an eligible
site acquired under this subsection shall be subject to section
6(f)(3) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16
U.S.C. 460l-8(f)(3)).
``(6) Reports.-``(A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the
date of the enactment of this subparagraph, the
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the
activities carried out under this subsection.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--Not later than
2 years after the date of the enactment of this
subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a
report that updates the Battlefield Report to reflect-``(i) preservation activities carried out at
the 384 battlefields during the period between
publication of the Battlefield Report and the
update;
``(ii) changes in the condition of the
battlefields during that period; and
``(iii) any other relevant developments
relating to the battlefields during that period.
``(7) Authorization of appropriations.-``(A) In general.--There are authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary from the Land and Water
Conservation Fund to provide grants under this
subsection $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

33

through 2008.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--There are
authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry
out paragraph (6)(B), $500,000.''; and
(4) in subsection (e)-(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``as of'' and all
that follows through the period and inserting ``on
September 30, 2008.''; and
(B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and provide
battlefield acquisition grants'' after ``studies''.

-end-

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

34

Appendix B. Battlefield Questionnaire
State
Battlefield
Person Completing Form
Date of completion

I. Protected Lands of the Battlefield (“Protected lands” are these “owned” for historic
preservation or conservation purposes. Please provide information on land protected since 1993.)
Identify protected lands by parcel since 1993. Then answer these questions about each parcel,
following example in the chart below. What is the acreage of each parcel? Is parcel owned fee
simple, by whom? Is there is an easement, if so name easement holder? Was the land purchased or
the easement conveyed after 1993? What was cost of purchase or easement? What was source of
funding and the amount that source contributed? Choose from these possible sources: Coin money,
LWCF, Farm Bill, State Government, Local Government, Private Owner, Private Non-Profit (provide
name), or Other (describe).
Parcel

Acres Owner

Easement Year

Cost

Source

Joe Smith Farm

194

Private

SHPO

1995

$500,000

LWCF/$250,000
Private/$250,000

Sue Jones Tract

16

Battlefield Friends, Inc. No

2002

$41,000

State/$20,000
BFI/$21,000

2) Other public or non-profit lands within the battlefield? (Y/N)
•

If yes, describe

•

Name of public or non-profit owner or easement holder

•

Number of Acres owned/held

3) Is the information in a GIS? (Y/N)
If yes, may NPS obtain a copy of the data? (Y/N)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

35

II. Preservation Groups
1) Is there a formal interested entity (friends group, etc) associated with the battlefield? (Y/N)
If yes
Name
Address
Phone
Fax
E-mail
Web site? (Y/N)
If yes, what is the URL?
Does the web site have a preservation message? (Y/N)
What year did the group form?

III. Public Access and Interpretation
1) Does the site have designated Public Access? (Y/N) (Count public roads if there are designated
interpretive signs or pull-offs)
If yes, what entity provides the public access (Access may occur on lands owned in fee or under
easement to the above entities)
Federal government
State government
Local government

Private Nonprofit organization
Private owner
Other

Name of entity (if applicable)
Number of Acres Accessible to the Public (size of the area in which the public may physically visit
without trespassing. Do not include viewsheds.)

2) Does the site have interpretation? (Y/N)
If yes, what type of interpretation is available?
Visitor Center
Brochure(s)
Wayside exhibits
Driving Tour
Walking Tour

Audio tour tapes
Maintained historic features/areas
Living History
Website
Other

IV. Registration
Applies only to the battlefield landscape, not to individual contributing features of a battlefield
(i.e., the individually listed Dunker Church property of .2 acres does not represent the Antietam
battlefield for the purposes of this exercise)
1) Is the site a designated National Historic Landmark? (Y/N)
If yes, NHL and ID Number
2) Is the site listed in the National Register? (Y/N)
If yes, NRHP Name and ID Number
3) Is the site listed in the State Register? (Y/N)
If yes, State Register Name and ID Number
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

36

4) Is the site in the State Inventory? (Y/N)
If yes, State Inventory Name and ID Number
5)

Is the site designated as a local landmark or historic site? (Y/N)
Type of Designation/Listing

V. Program Activities
What types of preservation program activities have occurred at the battlefield? Provide final
product name and date if applicable (e.g., Phase I Archeological Survey Report on the Piper Farm,
1994 and Antietam Preservation Plan, 2001, etc.)
1) Research and Documentation

2) Cultural Resource surveys and inventories (building/structure and landscape inventories,
archeological surveys, landscape surveys, etc.)

3) Planning Projects (preservation plans, site management plans, cultural landscape reports, etc.)

4) Interpretation Projects (also includes education)

5) Advocacy (any project meant to engage the public in a way that would benefit the preservation
of the site, e.g. PR, lobbying, public outreach, petitioning for action, etc.)

6) Legislation (any local, state, or federal legislation designed to encourage preservation of the
battlefield individually or together with other similar sites)

7) Fundraising
a. To support program activities?
b. To support land acquisition/easements?

8) Other

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

37

Appendix C. Civil War Battlefield Land Acquisition Grants
In 1998, the ABPP began its land acquisition grant program, which helps states and local
communities purchase significant Civil War battlefield lands for permanent protection. In
2002, Congress officially authorized the program.16 Eligible battlefields are those listed in
the 1993 Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields prepared by the Congressionallychartered CWSAC. Eligible acquisition projects may be for fee interest in land or for a
protective interest such as a perpetual easement.
Congress has appropriated a total of $34.9 million for this Civil War Battlefield Land
Acquisition Grants. These grants have assisted in the permanent protection of 14,741 acres
at 59 Civil War battlefields in 14 states. While there have been no applicants from the Far
Western States, all four of the battlefields profiled in this report are eligible to receive
funding.

16

The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (PL 107- 359) amended the American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 USC
469k) to authorize the land acquisition grants.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

38

Appendix D. American Battlefield Protection Program Planning Grants
Through its American Battlefield Protection Program, the Federal government also
provides grants and technical advice to communities working to preserve battlefields. The
ABPP has two grant programs: planning grants and land acquisition grants.
Since 1992, the ABPP has offered annual planning grants to nonprofit organizations,
academic institutions, and local, regional, state, and tribal governments to help protect
battlefields located on American soil. Applicants are encouraged to work with partner
organizations and federal, State and local government agencies as early as possible to
integrate their efforts into a larger battle site protection strategy. Although all four
battlefields profiled within this report are eligible for funding, monies have not yet been
awarded to projects associated with the battles of Bear River and Valverde.
Grantee

Year

Project Title

Friends of Pecos
$21,400.00
National Historical Park

2009

Preservation of Apache

National Parks and
Conservation Association

Award

Canyon Bridge

1998

Restoring Glorieta Battlefield

Total ABPP Planning Grants as of 2009

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT – States of Colorado, Idaho, and New Mexico

$36,600.00
$58,000.00

39


