U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
State of Indiana
Washington, DC
July 2009

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
State of Indiana
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program
Washington, DC
July 2009

Authority
The American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996, as amended by the Civil War
Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December
2002), directs the Secretary of the Interior to update the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields.

Acknowledgments
NPS Project Team Paul Hawke, Project Leader; Kathleen Madigan, Survey Coordinator;
Tanya Gossett and January Ruck, Reporting; Shannon Davis, Preservation Specialist;
Matthew Borders, Historian; Renee S. Novak and Gweneth Langdon, Interns.
Battlefield Surveyor(s) Joseph E. Brent, Mudpuppy and Waterdog, Inc.
Respondents Claudia Howard, Superintendant of Parks, Harrison County Parks and
Recreation Department; and Frank D. Hurdis, Jr., Assistant Director for Preservation
Services, Indiana Department of Natural Resources, Division of Historic Preservation and
Archaeology.

Cover: Corydon Battlefield, east of Battle of Corydon Memorial Park, Harrison County,
Indiana. Photograph by Joseph E. Brent, 2005.

Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ......................................................................................... 1
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... 3
SYNOPSIS ............................................................................................................ 5
METHOD STATEMENT ......................................................................................... 6
RESEARCH AND FIELD SURVEY ........................................................................................... 6
QUESTIONNAIRE .............................................................................................................. 9
SUMMARY OF CONDITIONS OF INDIANA’S CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD ............ 10
QUANTIFIED LAND AREAS ............................................................................................... 10
CONDITION ASSESSMENT ................................................................................................ 10
REGISTRATION............................................................................................................... 11
STEWARDSHIP ............................................................................................................... 12
PUBLIC ACCESS AND INTERPRETATION ............................................................................... 12
LOCAL ADVOCACY ........................................................................................................ 12
INDIVIDUAL BATTLEFIELD PROFILE .................................................................. 15
APPENDICES ...................................................................................................... 19
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B.
APPENDIX C.
APPENDIX D.

CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD PRESERVATION ACT OF 2002 .................................... 19
BATTLEFIELD QUESTIONNAIRE ...................................................................... 22
CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD LAND ACQUISITION GRANTS ...................................... 24
AMERICAN BATTLEFIELD PROTECTION PROGRAM PLANNING GRANTS ................ 25

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

2

Introduction
The information in this report fulfills, in part, the purposes of the Civil War Battlefield
Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016). Those purposes are:
1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect nationally significant Civil
War battlefields through conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
(2) to create partnerships among state and local governments, regional entities, and
the private sector to preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil
War battlefields.
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 directs the Secretary of the Interior,
acting through the American Battlefield Protection Program of the National Park Service,
to update the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil
War Battlefields. The CWSAC was established by Congress in 1991 and published its report
in 1993. Congress provided funding for this update in FY2005 and FY2007. Congress
asked that the updated report reflect the following:
•
•
•

Preservation activities carried out at the 384 battlefields identified by the CWSAC
during the period between 1993 and the update;
Changes in the condition of the battlefields during that period; and
Any other relevant developments relating to the battlefields during that period.

In accordance with the legislation, this report presents information about Indiana’s Civil
War battlefield for use by Congress, federal, state, and local government agencies,
landowners, and other interest groups. Other state reports will be issued as surveys and
analyses are completed.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

3

Figure 1. Corydon, the only CWSAC battlefield in Indiana, is located west of
Louisville, Kentucky.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

4

Synopsis
In 1993, the CWSAC report identified Indiana’s only Civil War battlefield, Corydon, as a
resource meriting additional preservation protection. At that time, a five-acre portion of
the more than 3,800-acre battlefield was already protected as a county park. Since 1993,
little preservation work has been undertaken to protect the privately owned portions of
this historic landscape. In addition, future efforts to preserve this battlefield will be
complicated by the fact that a portion of the battlefield’s southern Core Area crosses Ohio
River and stretches into Kentucky.
During the Civil War, most of the area was used for agricultural purposes. In 2005, ABPP
surveyors found more than half of Corydon’s Study Area to retain a rural character.
However, while the landscape still includes many wooded areas and, while land use is
predominantly agricultural, a significant portion of the Corydon battlefield Study Area
has been lost to residential development. This pressure, which has expanded west towards
Corydon from Louisville, Kentucky, has been carried by I-64, which is less than five miles
from the battlefield. Thanks to easy access provided by the interstate, the greatest
concentrations of residential development have occurred within the battlefield Core Areas.
Given the nature of this threat to Corydon, the need for more aggressive preservation
activity is apparent. Land and cultural resource protection at this site should be the focus
of intensified local, state, and federal battlefield preservation efforts in Indiana during the
next three to five years.
Table 1 indicates how the CWSAC prioritized Indiana’s Civil War battlefield in 1993. The
National Park Service will issue updated priorities after all of the CWSAC battlefields
nationwide have been surveyed and all state reports have been completed.

Table 1. CWSAC Preservation Priorities from 1993
CWSAC Priority

Battlefield

County

I Critical Need

None

NA

II Comprehensive Preservation Possible

None

NA

III Additional Protection Needed

Corydon

Harrison

IV Fragmented/Destroyed

None

NA

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

5

Method Statement
Congress instructed the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American Battlefield
Protection Program (ABPP), to report on changes in the condition of the battlefields since
1993 and on “preservation activities” and “other relevant developments” carried out at
each battlefield since 1993. To fulfill those assignments, the ABPP 1) conducted site
surveys of each battlefield and 2) prepared and sent out questionnaires to battlefield
managers and advocacy organizations (see Appendix B).

Research and Field Survey
The ABPP conducted the field assessment of Corydon in November 2005. The survey
entailed additional historical research, on-the-ground documentation and assessment of
site conditions, identification of impending threats to each site, and site mapping.
Surveyors used a Global Positioning System (GPS) to map historic features of the battlefield
and used a Geographic Information System (GIS) to draw site boundaries. The ABPP
retains all final survey materials. The battlefield survey file includes a survey form (field
notes, list of defining features, list of documentary sources, and a photo log),
photographs, spatial coordinates of significant features, and boundaries described on
USGS topographic maps. The survey did not include archeological investigations for
reasons of time and expense.
Study Areas and Core Areas
The CWSAC identified a Study Area and a Core Area for each principal battlefield (see
Figure 2). The CWSAC boundaries have proven invaluable as guides to local land and
resource preservation efforts at Civil War battlefields. However, since 1993, the National
Park Service has refined its battlefield survey techniques, which include research, working
with site stewards, identifying and documenting lines of approach and withdrawal used by
opposing forces, and applying the concepts of military terrain analysis to all battlefield
landscapes. The ABPP’s Battlefield Survey Manual explains the field methods employed
during this study.1 The surveys also incorporate the concepts recommended in the
National Register of Historic Places’ Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering
America’s Historic Battlefields, which was published in 1992 after the CWSAC completed its
original assessments of the battlefields.
Using its refined methodology, ABPP was able to validate or adjust the CWSAC’s Study
Area and Core Area boundaries to reflect more accurately the full nature and original
resources of these battlefields (see Table 2). At Corydon the refined methodology
resulted in significant increases to the sizes of the Study Area and Core Area. However, it
is important to note that the Study Area and Core Area boundaries are simply historical
boundaries that describe where the battle took place; neither indicates the current
integrity of the battlefield landscape, so neither can be used on its own to identify
surviving portions of battlefield land that may merit protection and preservation.

1

American Battlefield Protection Program, “Battlefield Survey Manual,” (Washington, DC: National Park Service, revised 2007),
http://www.nps.gov/history/abpp/battlefieldsurveymanual.pdf , October 2008.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

6

Potential National Register
Boundaries
To address the question of what part of
the battlefield remains reasonably intact
and warrants preservation, this study
introduced a third boundary line that
was not attempted by the CWSAC: the
Potential National Register boundary
(see Figure 2).
Looking at each Study Area, the
surveyors assigned PotNR boundaries
where they judged that enough
battlefield land remained to convey the
significance of the engagement. In a
few cases, the PotNR boundary
encompasses the entire Study Area. In
most cases, however, the PotNR
boundary includes less land than
identified in the full Study Area.
In assigning PotNR boundaries, the ABPP
followed National Register of Historic
Places guidelines when identifying and
mapping areas that retain integrity and
cohesion within the Study Areas.2
However, because the ABPP focuses only
on areas of battle, the ABPP did not
evaluate lands adjacent to the Study
Area that may contribute to a broader
historical and chronological definition of
“cultural landscape.” Lands outside of
the Study Area associated with other
historic events and cultural practices may
need to be evaluated in preparation for
a formal nomination of the cultural
landscape.

Figure 2: Boundary Definitions
The Study Area represents the historic extent of
the battle as it unfolded across the landscape.
The Study Area contains resources known to
relate to or contribute to the battle event: where
troops maneuvered and deployed, immediately
before and after combat, and where they fought
during combat. Historic accounts, terrain
analysis, and feature identification inform the
delineation of the Study Area boundary. The
Study Area indicates the extent to which historic
and archeological resources associated with the
battle (areas of combat, command,
communications, logistics, medical services, etc.)
may be found and protected. Surveyors
delineated Study Area boundaries for every
battle site that was positively identified through
research and field survey, regardless of its
present integrity.
The Core Area represents the areas of fighting
on the battlefield. Positions that delivered or
received fire, and the intervening space and
terrain between them, fall within the Core Area.
Frequently described as “hallowed ground,” land
within the Core Area is often the first to be
targeted for protection. The Core Area lies
within the Study Area.
Unlike the Study and Core Areas, which are
based only upon the interpretation of historic
events, the Potential National Register
(PotNR) boundary represents ABPP’s assessment
of a Study Area’s current integrity (the surviving
landscape and features that convey the site’s
historic sense of place). The PotNR boundary
may include all or some of the Study Area, and
all or some of the Core Area. Lands within PotNR
boundaries should be considered worthy of
further attention, although future evaluations
may reveal more or less integrity than indicated
by the ABPP surveys.

Most importantly, the PotNR boundary
does not constitute a formal
determination of eligibility by the
Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places.3 The PotNR boundary is designed
to be used as a planning tool for government agencies and the public. Like the Study and
Core Area boundaries, the PotNR boundary places no restriction on private property use.

2

For general guidance about integrity issues and National Register properties, see National Park Service, How to Apply the National
Register Criteria for Evaluation (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, revised 1997). The survey evaluations described
above do not meet the more stringent integrity standards for National Historic Landmark designation. See National Park Service,
How to Prepare National Historic Landmark Nominations (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, 1999), 36- 37.
3
See 36 CFR 60.1- 14 for regulations about nominating a property to the National Register and 36 CFR 63 for regulations concerning
Determinations of Eligibility for inclusion in the National Register.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

7

The term integrity, as defined by the National Register of Historic Places, is “the ability of a
property to convey its significance.”4 While assessments of integrity are subjective,
battlefields can have integrity only if they can be positively located through research and
“ground-truthing,” and only if significant portions of the landscape’s historic terrain have
not been substantially disturbed. Other conditions contribute to the degree of integrity a
battlefield retains:
•

the quantity and quality of surviving battle-period resources (e.g.,
buildings, roads, fence lines, military structures, and archeological
features);

•

the quantity and quality of the spatial relationships between and among
those resources and the intervening terrain that connects them;

•

the extent to which current battlefield land use is similar to battle-period
land use; and

•

the extent to which a battlefield’s physical features and overall character
visually communicate an authentic sense of the sweep and setting of the
battle.

Natural changes in vegetation—woods growing out of historic farm fields, for example—
do not necessarily diminish the landscape’s integrity. Significant changes in land use since
the Civil War do affect integrity; the degree to which post-war development has altered
and fragmented the historic landscape and destroyed historic features is critical when
assessing integrity. Still, some post-battle development is expected; slight or moderate
change within the battlefield may not substantially diminish a battlefield’s integrity.
Often these post-battle “non-contributing” elements are included in the PotNR boundary
in accordance with National Register of Historic Places guidelines.
The Potential National Register boundaries therefore indicate which battlefields are likely
eligible for future listing in the National Register of Historic Places and likely deserving of
future preservation efforts. If a surveyor determined that a battlefield was entirely
compromised by land use incompatible with the preservation of historic features (i.e., it
has little or no integrity), it did not receive a PotNR boundary. In cases where a battlefield
was already listed in the National Register, surveyors reassessed the existing
documentation based on current scholarship and resource integrity, and, when
appropriate, provided new information and proposed new boundaries as part of the
surveys. As a result, some PotNR boundaries will contain lands already listed in the
National Register of Historic Places. In other cases, PotNR boundaries will exclude listed
lands that have lost integrity.5
The data from which all three boundaries are drawn do not necessarily reflect the full
research needed for a formal National Register nomination. Potential National Register
boundaries are based on an assessment of aboveground historic features associated with
4

National Park Service, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, 1992 (Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources Division), 10. Archeological integrity was not
examined during this study, but should be considered in future battlefield studies and formal nominations to the National Register.
5
The ABPP’s surveys and PotNR assessments do not constitute formal action on behalf of the office of the National Register of
Historic Places. PotNR assessments are intended for planning purposes only; they do not carry the authority to add, change, or
remove an official listing.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

8

the cultural and natural landscape. The surveys did not include a professional
archeological inventory or assessment of subsurface features or indications. In some cases,
future archeological testing will help determine whether subsurface features remain,
whether subsurface battle features convey important information about a battle or
historic property, and whether that information may help to confirm, refine, or refute the
boundaries previously determined by historic studies and terrain analysis.
The ABPP survey information should be reassessed during future compliance processes
such as the Section 106 process required by the National Historic Preservation Act6 and
Environmental Impact Statements/Environmental Assessments required by the National
Environmental Policy Act.7 Likewise, more detailed research and assessments should take
place when any battlefield is formally nominated to the National Register or proposed for
designation as a National Historic Landmark. New research and intensive-level surveys of
these sites will enlighten future preservation and compliance work. Agencies should
continue to consult local and state experts for up-to-date information about these
battlefields.
A small portion of Corydon, has already been listed in the National Register of Historic
Places (see Registration). With the expansion of the battlefield’s Study and Core Areas, the
PotNR boundary, as identified by the ABPP, provides guidance for expansion of the
existing National Register boundaries to include more than 77 percent of the total Study
Area.

Questionnaire
While the ABPP maintains data about its own program activities at Civil War battlefields,
most preservation work occurs at the local level. Therefore, to carry out the Congressional
directive for information about activities at the battlefields, the ABPP sought input from
local battlefield managers and advocacy organizations. The ABPP distributed
questionnaires designed to gather information about the types of preservation activities
that have taken place at the battlefields since 1993. The Questionnaire is reproduced in
Appendix B.
Responses were provided by representatives from the Harrison County Parks and
Recreation Department. Input from these sources, combined with the survey findings,
allowed the ABPP to create a profile of conditions and activities at Indiana’s Civil War
battlefield.

6
7

16 USC 470f.
42 USC 4331- 4332.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

9

Summary of Conditions of Indiana’s Civil War Battlefield
Quantified Land Areas
Using Geographic Information Systems, the ABPP calculated the amount of land
historically associated with the battle (Study Area), the amount of land where forces were
engaged (Core Area), and the amount of land that may retain enough integrity to be
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places and that remains to be
protected (Potential National Register boundary).
As noted above and as Table 2 illustrates, the Study Area and Core Area of Corydon have
been revised. In particular, the original CWSAC surveys did not consistently include routes
of approach and withdrawal or secondary actions that influenced the course or outcome
of the battle. The revised boundaries take these movements and actions into account. In
some instances, new or additional research has sharpened our understanding of battle
events. Therefore, the ABPP determined that additional lands belong appropriately in the
Study and Core Areas because they lend additional understanding to the battle story.
Please see the individual battlefield profile at the end of this report for more information
about the extent of and reasons for any revisions to the CWSAC Study Area and Core Area
boundaries.

Table 2. Battlefield Area Statistics
Battlefield

Boundary
Type

Established/Revised*

Acres**

Corydon (IN001)

Study Area
Core Area
PotNR

2009
2009
2009

3,122.96
280.31
2,456.81

* If the ABPP adjusted the boundaries based on research or refined survey methods, the year in which the
revision was made is given
**Boundary figures reflect only those areas in Indiana. See the Individual Battlefield Profile for information
about the size of battlefield lands as they extend into Kentucky.

Condition Assessment
Using field survey data, the ABPP assessed the overall condition of each battlefield’s Study
Area with the expectation that no battlefield would remain completely unaltered since the
Civil War. At Corydon, moderate change to terrain and aboveground battle features has
occurred during the past 150 years.8 During the 1860s, most of this area was farmland.
Today, land use in the battlefield Study Area is still 60 percent agricultural, while
approximately 15 percent of the landscape has seen some form of development. In the
Core Areas, the percentage of agricultural land use decreased to 55 percent, while
development has increased suburbanized areas to 25 percent. In areas of development,
8

The condition of archeological resources within the battlefields was not assessed. Future studies are needed to determine the
degree of archeological integrity associated with subsurface battle deposits.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

10

the battlefield’s integrity has been diminished by construction of single-family homes,
commercial buildings, and transportation infrastructure.

Table 3. Condition Summary
Condition

Battlefield

Land use is little changed (0)

NA

Portions of landscape have been altered, but most
essential features remain (1)

Corydon

Much of the landscape has been altered and
fragmented, leaving some essential features (0)

NA

Landscape and terrain have been altered beyond
recognition (0)

NA

Battlefields that were not assessed (0)

NA

Registration
The nation’s official method for recognizing historic properties worthy of preservation is
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Registered battlefields meet
national standards for documentation, physical integrity, and demonstrable significance to
the history of our nation. Federal, state, and local agencies use information from the
National Register as a planning tool to identify and make decisions about cultural
resources. Federal and state laws, most notably Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, require agencies to account for the effects their projects (roads,
wetland permits, quarrying, cell towers, etc.) may have on listed and eligible historic
properties, such as battlefields. Listing allows project designers to quickly identify the
battlefield and avoid or minimize impacts to the landscape.
Properties listed on the National Register are also eligible for numerous federal and state
historic preservation grant programs. Recognition as a registered battlefield may also
advance public understanding of and appreciation for the battlefield, and may encourage
advocacy for its preservation.9
As noted above, a small portion of Corydon is already listed in the NRHP. This piece was
registered in 1979, prior to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission’s study of battlefields
in the early 1990s. The boundaries of “Corydon Battle Site,” include 5.00 acres. Surveys
9

There are three levels of federal recognition for historic properties. Congressional designations, such as national park units,
National Historic Landmarks, and listings in the National Register of Historic Places. Congress creates national park units. The
Secretary of the Interior designates National Historic Landmarks (NHL) – nationally significant historic sites – for their exceptional
value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the heritage of the United States. The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is
the nation’s official list of cultural sites significant at the national, state, or local level and worthy of preservation. National park units
and NHLs are also treated as listed in the National Register.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

11

conducted during this study indicate that additional lands – more than 2,400.00 acres in
Indiana and more than 500.00 acres in Kentucky (more than 77 percent of the total Study
Area ) – may be eligible to add to the existing NRHP listing.

Stewardship
While the majority of Corydon is in private, unprotected ownership, the municipal
government of Harrison County does own and manage a small portion of the battlefield.
The Battle of Corydon Memorial Park was established by the Harrison County Parks and
Recreation Department after the five-acre property was donated by a private owner in
1975. The site includes a commemorative monument, interpretive signage, and a wooded
walking trail, among other resources. The additional 2,400.00 acres of unprotected, intact
land within Indiana and 500.00 acres in Kentucky would be well served by similar
stewardship efforts.

Public Access and Interpretation
In its questionnaire, the ABPP asked battlefield stewards about the types of public access
and interpretation available at the battlefield. The ABPP did not collect information about
the purpose or intent of the interpretation and access, such as whether a wayside exhibit
was developed for purely educational reasons, to promote heritage tourism, or boost local
economic development.
The ABPP asked respondents to indicate the type of interpretation available at or about
the battlefield. The categories included brochures, driving tours, living history
demonstrations, maintained historic features or areas, walking tours and trails, wayside
exhibits, websites, and other specialized programs. The results indicate that the county
park at Corydon currently provides a variety of public interpretation and educational
opportunities. While Corydon does not have a Visitor Center, the park does provide
wayside exhibits and commemorative signage within a wooded walking trail. The site
includes a Civil War monument and offers interpretive brochures for public education.

Local Advocacy
Nonprofit organizations play important roles in protecting historic battlefields. Nonprofit
organizations step in to preserve historic sites when public funding and management for
historic preservation are absent. When public funding is available, nonprofits serve as vital
partners in public-private preservation efforts, acting as conduits for public funds, raising
critical private matching funds, keeping history and preservation in the public eye, and
working with landowners to find ways to protect battlefield parcels.
At Corydon, the Battle of Corydon Memorial Park Advisory Board, which works
cooperatively with the Harrison County Parks and Recreation Department and other
stakeholders, promotes educational and commemorative events for the battlefield. While
other organizations with more general historical interests may also play important roles in
battlefield preservation within the state of Indiana, the Battlefield of Corydon Memorial
Park Advisory Board is recognized within this report for being the only organization
dedicated solely to the goals of battlefield preservation, interpretation, and promotion.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

12

Figure 3: Battle of Corydon Memorial Park, Harrison County, Indiana.
Photograph by Joseph E. Brent, 2005

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

13

Individual Battlefield Profile
Battlefield Profile Glossary
Location

County or city in which the battlefield is located.

Campaign

Name of military campaign of which the battle was part. Campaign
names are taken from The War of the Rebellion: a Compilation of the
Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies.

Battle Date(s)

Day or days upon which the battle took place, as determined by the
Civil War Sites Advisory Commission.

Principal Commanders Ranking commanders of opposing forces during the battle.
Forces Engaged

Name or description of largest units engaged during the battle.

Results

Indicates battle victor or inconclusive outcome.

Study Area

Acres within the Study Area (see Table 2), as determined by the ABPP,
that represent the historic extent of the battle upon the landscape.

Potential National
Register Lands

Acres of land that retain historic character and may be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (see Table 2).

Protected Lands

Estimated acres (based on questionnaires and GIS) of battlefield land
set aside or placed under permanent easement since the Civil War for
the purposes of maintaining the historic character of the landscape
and for preventing future impairment or destruction of the landscape
and historic features.

Publicly Accessible
Lands

Estimated acres (based on responses to questionnaires) maintained
for public visitation.

Management Area

Name of historic site, park, or other area maintained for
resource protection and/or public visitation.

Friends Group(s)

Name of local advocacy organization(s) that support preservation
activities at/for the battlefield.

Preservation
Activities
Since 1993

Indicates which types of preservation activities have taken place at
the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses to questionnaires).

Public
Interpretation
Since 1993

Indicates which types of interpretation/educational activities have
taken place at the battlefield since 1993 (based on
responses to questionnaires).

Condition Statement The ABPP’s assessment of the overall condition of the battlefield’s
Study Area (based on field surveys and responses to questionnaires).
Historical Designation Notes the most prestigious historical designation the battlefield has
received (i.e. national park unit, National Historic Landmark, or
National Register of Historic Places).
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

15

Corydon (IN001)
Location

Harrison County, IN; Meade County, KY

Campaign

Morgan’s Raid in Kentucky, Indiana, and Ohio (July 1863)

Battle Date(s)

July 9, 1863

Principal Commanders

Brevet Col. Lewis Jordan [US]; Brig. Gen. John Hunt Morgan [CS]

Forces Engaged

Indiana Legion, 400 [US]; Morgan’s Cavalry Division, 1,800 [CS]

Results

Confederate victory

Study Area

3,806.29 acres (3,122.96 acres in Indiana; 683.33 acres in
Kentucky)
The new Study Area includes the site of the Confederate
crossing of the Ohio River. Here, the Indiana Home
Guard contested the Confederate advance into the state.

Potential National
Register Lands

2,967.54 acres (2456.81 acres in Indiana; 510.73 acres in
Kentucky)

Protected Lands

5.00 acres
Harrison County Parks and Recreation Department, fee
simple

Publicly Accessible
Lands

5.00 acres

Management Area(s)

Battle of Corydon Memorial Park

Friends Group(s)

Battle of Corydon Park Advisory Board

Harrison County Parks and Recreation Department, Battle
of Corydon Memorial Park

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
http://www.harrisoncoparks.com/BOC.html
http://www.corydonbattlepark.com

Other
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

16

Condition Statement

Portions of the Corydon landscape have been altered, but most
essential features remain. While development pressure from
Louisville, Kentucky, has diminished the integrity of portions of the
battlefield, most of Corydon is characterized by farmland and
wooded areas that retain historic and interpretive value.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (1979)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

17

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

18

Appendices
Appendix A. Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002
Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December 2002
Amends the American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k)

An Act
To amend the American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior
to establish a battlefield acquisition grant program.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ``Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002''.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
(a) Findings.--Congress finds the following
(1) Civil War battlefields provide a means for the people of
the United States to understand a tragic period in the history
of the United States.
(2) According to the Report on the Nation's Civil War
Battlefields, prepared by the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission, and dated July 1993, of the 384 principal Civil War
battlefields-(A) almost 20 percent are lost or fragmented;
(B) 17 percent are in poor condition; and
(C) 60 percent have been lost or are in imminent
danger of being fragmented by development and lost as
coherent historic sites.
(b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-(1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect
nationally significant Civil War battlefields through
conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
(2) to create partnerships among State and local
governments, regional entities, and the private sector to
preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil War
battlefields.
SEC. 3. BATTLEFIELD ACQUISITION GRANT PROGRAM.
The American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k) is amended-(1) by redesignating subsection (d) as paragraph (3) of
subsection (c), and indenting appropriately;
(2) in paragraph (3) of subsection (c) (as redesignated by
paragraph (1))—
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

19

(A) by striking ``Appropriations'' and inserting
``appropriations''; and
(B) by striking ``section'' and inserting
``subsection'';
(3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following
``(d) Battlefield Acquisition Grant Program.-``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection
``(A) Battlefield report.--The term `Battlefield
Report' means the document entitled `Report on the
Nation's Civil War Battlefields', prepared by the Civil
War Sites Advisory Commission, and dated July 1993.
``(B) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity'
means a State or local government.
``(C) Eligible site.--The term `eligible site' means
a site-``(i) that is not within the exterior
boundaries of a unit of the National Park System;
and
``(ii) that is identified in the Battlefield
Report.
``(D) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the
Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American
Battlefield Protection Program.
``(2) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a
battlefield acquisition grant program under which the Secretary
may provide grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share
of the cost of acquiring interests in eligible sites for the
preservation and protection of those eligible sites.
``(3) Nonprofit partners.--An eligible entity may acquire an
interest in an eligible site using a grant under this subsection
in partnership with a nonprofit organization.
``(4) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the total
cost of acquiring an interest in an eligible site under this
subsection shall be not less than 50 percent.
``(5) Limitation on land use.--An interest in an eligible
site acquired under this subsection shall be subject to section
6(f)(3) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16
U.S.C. 460l-8(f)(3)).
``(6) Reports.-``(A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the
date of the enactment of this subparagraph, the
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the
activities carried out under this subsection.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--Not later than
2 years after the date of the enactment of this
subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a
report that updates the Battlefield Report to reflect-``(i) preservation activities carried out at
the 384 battlefields during the period between
publication of the Battlefield Report and the
update;
``(ii) changes in the condition of the
battlefields during that period; and
``(iii) any other relevant developments
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

20

relating to the battlefields during that period.
``(7) Authorization of appropriations.-``(A) In general.--There are authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary from the Land and Water
Conservation Fund to provide grants under this
subsection $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004
through 2008.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--There are
authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry
out paragraph (6)(B), $500,000.''; and
(4) in subsection (e)-(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``as of'' and all
that follows through the period and inserting ``on
September 30, 2008.''; and
(B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and provide
battlefield acquisition grants'' after ``studies''.

-end-

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

21

Appendix B. Battlefield Questionnaire
State
Battlefield
Person Completing Form
Date of completion

I. Protected Lands of the Battlefield (“Protected lands” are these “owned” for historic
preservation or conservation purposes. Please provide information on land protected since 1993.)
1) Identify protected lands by parcel since 1993. Then answer these questions about each parcel,
following example in the chart below. What is the acreage of each parcel? Is parcel owned fee
simple, by whom? Is there is an easement, if so name easement holder? Was the land purchased or
the easement conveyed after 1993? What was cost of purchase or easement? What was source of
funding and the amount that source contributed? Choose from these possible sources: Coin money,
LWCF, Farm Bill, State Government, Local Government, Private Owner, Private Non-Profit (provide
name), or Other (describe).
Parcel

Acres Owner

Easement Year

Cost

Source

Joe Smith Farm

194

Private

SHPO

1995

$500,000

LWCF/$250,000
Private/$250,000

Sue Jones Tract

16

Battlefield Friends, Inc. No

2002

$41,000

State/$20,000
BFI/$21,000

2) Other public or non-profit lands within the battlefield? (Y/N)
•

If yes, describe

•

Name of public or non-profit owner or easement holder

•

Number of Acres owned/held

3) Is the information in a GIS? (Y/N)
If yes, may NPS obtain a copy of the data? (Y/N)
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

22

II. Preservation Groups
1) Is there a formal interested entity (friends group, etc) associated with the battlefield? (Y/N)
If yes
Name
Address
Phone
Fax
E-mail
Web site? (Y/N)
If yes, what is the URL?
Does the web site have a preservation message? (Y/N)
What year did the group form?

III. Public Access and Interpretation
1) Does the site have designated Public Access? (Y/N) (Count public roads if there are designated
interpretive signs or pull-offs)
If yes, what entity provides the public access (Access may occur on lands owned in fee or under
easement to the above entities)
Federal government
State government
Local government

Private Nonprofit organization
Private owner
Other

Name of entity (if applicable)
Number of Acres Accessible to the Public (size of the area in which the public may physically visit
without trespassing. Do not include viewsheds.)

2) Does the site have interpretation? (Y/N)
If yes, what type of interpretation is available?
Visitor Center
Brochure(s)
Wayside exhibits
Driving Tour
Walking Tour

Audio tour tapes
Maintained historic features/areas
Living History
Website
Other

IV. Registration
Applies only to the battlefield landscape, not to individual contributing features of a battlefield
(i.e., the individually listed Dunker Church property of .2 acres does not represent the Antietam
battlefield for the purposes of this exercise)
1) Is the site a designated National Historic Landmark? (Y/N)
If yes, NHL and ID Number
2) Is the site listed in the National Register? (Y/N)
If yes, NRHP Name and ID Number
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

23

3) Is the site listed in the State Register? (Y/N)
If yes, State Register Name and ID Number
4) Is the site in the State Inventory? (Y/N)
If yes, State Inventory Name and ID Number
5)

Is the site designated as a local landmark or historic site? (Y/N)
Type of Designation/Listing

V. Program Activities
What types of preservation program activities have occurred at the battlefield? Provide
final product name and date if applicable (e.g., Phase I Archeological Survey Report on the
Piper Farm, 1994 and Antietam Preservation Plan, 2001, etc.)
1) Research and Documentation

2) Cultural Resource surveys and inventories (building/structure and landscape
inventories, archeological surveys, landscape surveys, etc.)

3) Planning Projects (preservation plans, site management plans, cultural landscape
reports, etc.)

4) Interpretation Projects (also includes education)

5) Advocacy (any project meant to engage the public in a way that would benefit the
preservation of the site, e.g. PR, lobbying, public outreach, petitioning for action,
etc.)

6) Legislation (any local, state, or federal legislation designed to encourage
preservation of the battlefield individually or together with other similar sites)

7) Fundraising
a. To support program activities?
b. To support land acquisition/easements?

8) Other
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

23

Appendix C. Civil War Battlefield Land Acquisition Grants
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (PL 107-359) amended the American
Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 USC 469k) to authorize a matching grant program to
assist States and local communities in acquiring significant Civil War battlefield lands for
permanent protection. Most recently, Congress showed its continued support for these
grants through its reauthorization of this program within the Omnibus Public Land
Management Act of 2009 (PL 111-11).
Eligible battlefields are those listed in the 1993 Report on the Nation’s Civil War
Battlefields prepared by the Congressionally-chartered Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
(CWSAC). Eligible acquisition projects may be for fee interest in land or for a protective
interest such as a perpetual easement.
Since 1998, Congress has appropriated a total of $38.9 million for this Civil War Battlefield
Land Acquisition Grants (CWBLAG). These grants have assisted in the permanent
protection of more than 15,742 acres at 61 Civil War battlefields in 14 states. While there
have been no CWBLAG grants awarded in Indiana to date, more than 2,900.00 acres of
Corydon battlefield may be eligible for land acquisition funding from this program.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

24

Appendix D. American Battlefield Protection Program Planning Grants

Since 1992, ABPP has offered annual planning grants to nonprofit organizations, academic
institutions, and local, regional, state, and tribal governments to help protect battlefields
located on American soil. Applicants are encouraged to work with partner organizations
and federal, State and local government agencies as early as possible to integrate their
efforts into a larger battle site protection strategy.
The ABPP planning grant program has supported projects in Indiana that were associated
with the battles of other conflicts. While ABPP has not yet awarded planning grant funds
to projects associated with Indiana’s Civil War battlefield, the program has granted nearly
$9,500,000 to 379 projects throughout the country. Projects associated with portions of
the Corydon battlefield Study Area are eligible to receive funding from this program.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
Final DRAFT –State of Indiana

25


