U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
State of Alabama
Washington, DC
May 2011

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
State of Alabama
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
American Battlefield Protection Program
Washington, DC
May 2011

Authority
The American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996, as amended by the Civil War
Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December
2002), directs the Secretary of the Interior to update the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields.

Acknowledgments
NPS Project Team Paul Hawke, Project Leader; Kathleen Madigan, Survey Coordinator;
Tanya Gossett, Paul Hawke, Reporting; Matthew Borders, Historian; Kristie Kendall,
Program Assistant
Battlefield Surveyor(s) Kathleen Madigan and Matthew Borders, American Battlefield
Protection Program; Joseph E. Brent, Mudpuppy & Waterdog, Inc.
Respondents Bill Rambo, Confederate Memorial Park; Mike Wise, Crooked Creek Civil
War Museum; Blanton Blankenship, Fort Morgan State Historic Site; Jo Ann Flirt, Historic
Blakely State Park; Michael Henderson, Historic Fort Gaines

Cover: Dry moat and walls at Fort Morgan. The fort is a defining feature of the Mobile Bay
battlefield. Photograph by Matthew Borders, 2009.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .................................................................................................... 1
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 3
SYNOPSIS........................................................................................................................ 5
METHOD STATEMENT ..................................................................................................... 7
RESEARCH AND FIELD SURVEYS ...................................................................................................... 7
QUESTIONNAIRES ....................................................................................................................... 11
SUMMARY OF CONDITIONS OF ALABAMA’S CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELDS ................... 12
QUANTIFIED LAND AREAS ........................................................................................................... 12
CONDITION ASSESSMENTS ........................................................................................................... 12
REGISTRATION ........................................................................................................................... 15
STEWARDSHIP ............................................................................................................................ 16
PUBLIC ACCESS AND INTERPRETATION........................................................................................... 18
ADVOCACY ............................................................................................................................... 19
INDIVIDUAL BATTLEFIELD PROFILES ........................................................................... 20
APPENDICES ................................................................................................................. 43
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B.
APPENDIX C.
APPENDIX D.

CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD LAND ACQUISITION GRANTS ................................................ 43
AMERICAN BATTLEFIELD PROTECTION PROGRAM PLANNING GRANTS .......................... 44
CIVIL WAR BATTLEFIELD PRESERVATION ACT OF 2002 ............................................... 45
BATTLEFIELD QUESTIONNAIRE ................................................................................. 48

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

Introduction
The information in this report fulfills, in part, the purposes of the Civil War Battlefield
Preservation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016). Those purposes are:
1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect nationally significant Civil
War battlefields through conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
2) to create partnerships among state and local governments, regional entities, and
the private sector to preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil
War battlefields.
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 directs the Secretary of the Interior,
acting through the American Battlefield Protection Program (ABPP) of the National Park
Service, to update the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission (CWSAC) Report on the Nation’s
Civil War Battlefields. The CWSAC was established by Congress in 1991 and published its
report in 1993. Congress provided funding for this update in FY 2005 and FY 2007.
Congress asked that the updated report reflect the following:
•
•
•

Preservation activities carried out at the 384 battlefields identified by the CWSAC
during the period between 1993 and the update;
Changes in the condition of the battlefields during that period; and
Any other relevant developments relating to the battlefields during that period.

In accordance with the legislation, this report presents information about Civil War
battlefields in Alabama for use by Congress, federal, state, and local government agencies,
landowners, and other interest groups. Other state reports will be issued as surveys and
analyses are completed.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

3

Figure 1. CWSAC Battlefields in Alabama.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

4

Synopsis
There are seven CWSAC battlefields in the State of Alabama – Athens, Day’s Gap,
Decatur, Fort Blakely, Mobile Bay, Selma, and Spanish Fort. Historically, these
battlefields encompassed nearly 102,400 acres.1 Today approximately 45,400 acres, or 44
percent, retain suffucient significance and integrity to make them worhy of preservation.2
In 1993, the CWSAC used a four-tiered system that combined historic significance, current
condition, and level of threat to determine priorities for preservation among the
battlefields. Table 1 indicates how the CWSAC prioritized Alabama’s Civil War battlefields
in its study.

Table 1. CWSAC Preservation Priorities from 1993
CWSAC Priority

Battlefield

County

I Critical Need

Mobile Bay (AL003)

Baldwin, Mobile

II Comprehensive Preservation Possible

N/A

N/A

III Additional Protection Needed

Day’s Gap (AL001)

Cullman, Morgan

Fort Blakely (AL006)

Baldwin

Athens (AL002)

Limestone, Morgan;
Giles County, TN

Decatur (AL004)

Lawrence, Limestone,
Morgan

Selma (AL007)

Dallas

Spanish Fort (AL005)

Baldwin

IV Fragmented/Destroyed

Currently, the battlefields indentified as Priority I and III sites retain a high degree of
integrity. While no battlefield remains completely unaltered since the Civil War, Day’s
Gap, Fort Blakely, and Mobile Bay have experienced relatively little change to their
terrain and aboveground features in nearly 150 years (see table 3).3
At Fort Blakely, the State of Alabama protects portions of the battlefield within Historic
Blakeley State Park and the W.L. Holland and Mobile-Tensaw Delta Wildlife Management
Areas. The state also preserves a portion of Mobile Bay at Fort Morgan State Historic Site.
Additional lands at Mobile Bay are protected by the Federal government (Bon Secour
National Wildlife Refuge) and the Dauphin Island Park and Beach Board (Historic Fort
Gaines and the Dauphin Island Audobon Bird Sanctuary).
Within the Day’s Gap Study Area, only 40 acres (less than 1 percent of the battlefield
lands that retain integrity) are protected. The protected land is owned by the Civil War
Trust, a non-profit organization devoted to the preservation of endangered Civil War
battlefields.

1
Using GIS software, and accounting for overlapping areas, the ABPP calculated that the Study Areas for the seven battlefields in
Alabama represent 102,396.35 acres.
2
Using GIS software the ABPP calculated that the Potential National Register Boundaries for the seven battlefields in Alabama
represent 45,499.46 acres.
3
The condition of archeological resources within the battlefields was not assessed. Future studies are needed to determine the
degree of archeological integrity associated with subsurface and underwater battle deposits.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

5

While the CWSAC determined that Athens did not retain enough integrity to merit
preservation, the American Battlefield Protection Program’s (ABPP) resurvey of the site has
shown that more than 13 percent of the battlefield does retain integrity. Much of the
landscape has been altered and fragmented; however, essential landscape features in the
Sulphur Creek Trestle Core Area north of the City of Athens remain much as they were
during the battle. In addition, a small portion of the battlefield is protected by the State
of Alabama as part of the Swan Creek Wildlife Management Area.
Decatur, Selma, and Spanish Fort are in urban settings and have suffered from modern
intrusion. All three battlefields have undergone considerable change since the Civil War.
While Decatur and Spanish Fort have lands within their Study Areas that are protected
by the State of Alabama and the Federal government as wildlife conservation areas, the
ABPP did not identify any additional portions of the three battlefields that retain integrity.
Today only commemorative and interpretive opportunities remain at these three
battlefields.
See the Individual Battlefield Profiles for condition assessments and preservation
recommendations. The National Park Service will issue updated priorities after all CWSAC
battlefields nationwide have been surveyed and all state reports have been completed.

Figure 2. View of the battlefield from high ground at the Day’s Gap. With over 2,900 acres
retaining integrity, Day’s Gap is one of the most intact and least protected Civil War battlefields in
Alabama. Photograph by Joseph E. Brent, 2009.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

6

Method Statement
Congress instructed the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American Battlefield
Protection Program (ABPP), to report on changes in the condition of the battlefields since
1993 and on “preservation activities” and “other relevant developments” carried out at
each battlefield since 1993. To fulfill those assignments, the ABPP 1) conducted a site
survey of each battlefield, and 2) prepared and sent out questionnaires to battlefield
managers and advocacy organizations (see Appendix D).
The 1993 significance rankings for each battlefield stand. Significance was assigned by the
Civil War Sites Advisory Commission and the ABPP sustains the CWSAC’s opinions as to the
relevant importance of each battle within the larger context of the war.

Research and Field Surveys
The ABPP conducted the field assessments of Alabama battlefields in January 2008 and
September 2009. The surveys entailed additional historical research, on-the-ground
documentation and assessment of site conditions, identification of impending threats to
each site, and site mapping. Surveyors used a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver to
map historic features of each battlefield and used a Geographic Information System (GIS)
program to draw site boundaries. The ABPP retains all final survey materials. Each
battlefield survey file includes a survey form (field notes, list of defining features, list of
documentary sources, and a photo log), photographs, spatial coordinates of significant
features, and boundaries described on USGS topographic maps. The surveys did not
include archeological investigations for reasons of time and expense.
Study Areas and Core Areas
The CWSAC identified a Study Area and a Core Area for each principal battlefield it
surveyed in Alabama, except Decatur (see Figure 3 for definitions). The CWSAC
boundaries have proven invaluable as guides to local land and resource preservation
efforts at Civil War battlefields. Since 1993 however, the National Park Service has refined
its battlefield survey methodology, which include research, working with site stewards,
identifying and documenting lines of approach and withdrawal used by opposing forces,
and applying the concepts of military terrain analysis to all battlefield landscapes. The
ABPP’s Battlefield Survey Manual explains the field methods employed during this study.4
The surveys also incorporate the concepts recommended in the National Register of
Historic Places’ Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, which was published in 1992 after the CWSAC completed its original
assessments of the battlefields.5
Using its refined methodology, the ABPP was able to validate or adjust the CWSAC’s Study
Area and Core Area boundaries to reflect more accurately the full nature and original
resources of these battlefields (see Table 2). At many of Alabama’s surveyed battlefields,
the refined methodology resulted in significant increases to the sizes of the Study Area
and Core Area. In particular, the original CWSAC surveys did not consistently include
routes of approach and withdrawal or secondary actions that influenced the course or
outcome of the battle. The revised boundaries take these movements and actions into
account.6 It is important to note however, that the Study Area and Core Area boundaries
4

American Battlefield Protection Program, “Battlefield Survey Manual,” (Washington, DC: National Park Service, revised 2007).
National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields, 1992 , Revised
1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources Division).
6
National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic Battlefields
(http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf), offers recommendations regarding “Selecting Defensible
Boundaries.” While the guidelines indicates that “generally, boundaries should not be drawn to include the portion of the route
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama
5

7

are simply historical boundaries that describe
where the battle took place; neither
indicates the current integrity of the
battlefield landscape, so neither can be used
on its own to identify surviving portions of
battlefield land that may merit protection
and preservation.
Potential National Register Boundaries
To address the question of what part of the
battlefield remains reasonably intact and
warrants preservation, this study introduced
a third boundary line that was not
attempted by the CWSAC: the Potential
National Register boundary (see Figure 3).
Looking at each Study Area, the surveyors
assigned PotNR boundaries where they
judged that the landscape retained enough
integrity to convey the significance of the
historic battle. In a few cases, the PotNR
boundary encompasses the entire Study
Area. In most cases, however, the PotNR
boundary includes less land than identified in
the full Study Area. Because many
battlefields are entirely in private ownership
and physical access to large portions of the
battlefields is limited to public right of ways,
the ABPP reviewed publicly available satellite
images of the battlefield Study Areas in
order to confirm or supplement surveyors’
field observations about land use and
landform integrity.7
In assigning PotNR boundaries, the ABPP
followed National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) guidelines when identifying and
mapping areas that retain integrity and
cohesion within the Study Areas.8 Because
the ABPP focuses only on areas of battle
however, it did not evaluate lands adjacent
to the Study Area that may contribute to a
broader historical and chronological

Figure 3: Boundary Definitions
The Study Area represents the historic extent
of the battle as it unfolded across the
landscape. The Study Area contains resources
known to relate to or contribute to the battle
event: where troops maneuvered and
deployed, immediately before, during, and
after combat, and where they fought during
combat. Historic accounts, terrain analysis,
and feature identification inform the
delineation of the Study Area boundary. The
Study Area indicates the extent to which
historic and archeological resources associated
with the battle (areas of combat, command,
communications, logistics, medical services,
etc.) may be found. Surveyors delineated
Study Area boundaries for every battle site
that was positively identified through research
and field survey, regardless of its present
integrity.
The Core Area represents the areas of
fighting on the battlefield. Positions that
delivered or received fire, and the intervening
space and terrain between them, fall within
the Core Area. Frequently described as
“hallowed ground,” land within the Core Area
is often the first to be targeted for protection.
There may be more than one Core Area on a
battlefield, but all lie within the Study Area.
Unlike the Study and Core Areas, which are
based only upon the interpretation of historic
events, the Potential National Register
(PotNR) boundary represents ABPP’s
assessment of a Study Area’s current integrity
(the surviving landscape and features that
convey the site’s historic sense of place). The
PotNR boundary may include all or some of
the Study Area, and all or some of the Core
Area. Lands within PotNR boundaries should
be considered worthy of further attention,
although future evaluations may reveal more
or less integrity than indicated by the ABPP
surveys.

taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters” they also state that “a basic principle is to include within the boundary all of
the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took actions based on their assumption of being in the
presence of the enemy.” The ABPP interprets this latter guidance to mean all military activities that influenced the battle.
7
The ABPP primarily used satellite images from the World Wide Web mapping services Bing, Google, and Yahoo. The date range
for the sattelite images was 2007-2010. The level of detail in the sattelite images available from each mapping service depended
upon the service’s coverage of a specified area; image resolutions were generally highly detailed in urban and suburban areas and
less detailed in rural areas.
8
For general guidance about integrity issues and National Register of Historic Places properties, see National Park Service, How to
Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, revised 1997). The survey
evaluations described above do not meet the more stringent integrity standards for National Historic Landmark designation. See
National Park Service, How to Prepare National Historic Landmark Nominations (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior,
1999), 36-37.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama
8

definition of “cultural landscape.” Lands outside of the Study Area associated with other
historic events and cultural practices may need to be evaluated in preparation for a formal
nomination of the cultural landscape.
Most importantly, the PotNR boundary does not constitute a formal determination of
eligibility by the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places.9 The PotNR
boundary is designed to be used as a planning tool for government agencies and the
public. Like the Study and Core Area boundaries, the PotNR boundary places no restriction
on private property use.
The term integrity, as defined by the NRHP, is “the ability of a property to convey its
significance.”10 While assessments of integrity are traditionally based on seven specific
attributes – location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association –
battlefields are unique cultural resources and require special evaluation.“ Generally, the
most important aspects of integrity for battlefields are location, setting, feeling and
association,” and the most basic test for determining the integrity of any battlefield is to
assess “whether a participant in the battle would recognize the property as it exists
today.”11
Other conditions contribute to the degree of integrity a battlefield retains:
•

the quantity and quality of surviving battle-period resources (e.g.,
buildings, roads, fence lines, military structures, and archeological
features);

•

the quantity and quality of the spatial relationships between and among
those historic resources and the landscape that connects them;

•

the extent to which current battlefield land use is similar to battle-period
land use; and

•

the extent to which a battlefield’s physical features and overall character
visually communicate an authentic sense of the sweep and setting of the
battle.

The degree to which post-war development has altered and fragmented the historic
landscape or destroyed historic features and viewsheds is critical when assessing integrity.
Changes in traditional land use over time do not generally diminish a battlefield’s
integrity. For example, landscapes that were farmland during the Civil War do not need to
be in agricultural use today to be considered eligible for listing in the NRHP so long as the
land retains its historic rural character. Similarly, natural changes in vegetation – woods
growing out of historic farm fields, for example – do not necessarily lessen the landscape’s
integrity.

9

See 36 CFR 60.1- 14 for regulations about nominating a property to the National Register of Historic Places and 36 CFR 63 for
regulations concerning Determinations of Eligibility for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
10
National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992, Revised 1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources
Division), http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf. Archeological integrity was not examined during this
study, but should be considered in future battlefield studies and formal nominations to the National Register of Historic Places.
11
National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992, Revised 1999 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Interagency Resources
Division).
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

9

Some post-battle development is expected; slight or moderate change within the
battlefield may not substantially diminish a battlefield’s integrity. A limited degree of
residential, commercial, or industrial development is acceptable. These post-battle “noncontributing” elements are often included in the PotNR boundary in accordance with
NRHP guidelines.12
Significant changes in land use since the Civil War do diminish the integrity of the
battlefield landscape. Heavy residential, commercial, and industrial development; cellular
tower and wind turbine installation; and large highway construction are common
examples of such changes. Battlefield landscapes with these types of changes are
generally considered as having little or no integrity.
The PotNR boundaries therefore indicate which battlefields are likely eligible for future
listing in the NRHP and likely deserving of future preservation efforts.13 If a surveyor
determined that a battlefield was entirely compromised by land use incompatible with the
preservation of historic features (i.e., it has little or no integrity), the ABPP did not assign a
PotNR boundary.14
In cases where a battlefield is already listed in the NRHP, surveyors reassessed the existing
documentation based on current scholarship and resource integrity, and, when
appropriate, provided new information and proposed new boundaries as part of the
surveys. As a result, some PotNR boundaries will contain or share a boundary with lands
already listed in the NRHP. In other cases, PotNR boundaries will exclude listed lands that
have lost integrity (see Table 4.)15
The data from which all three boundaries are drawn do not necessarily reflect the full
research needed for a formal NRHP nomination. PotNR boundaries are based on an
assessment of aboveground historic features associated with the cultural and natural
landscape. The surveys did not include a professional archeological inventory or
assessment of subsurface features or indications. In some cases, future archeological
testing will help determine whether subsurface features remain, whether subsurface battle
features convey important information about a battle or historic property, and whether
that information may help to confirm, refine, or refute the boundaries previously
determined by historic studies and terrain analysis.
The ABPP survey information should be reassessed during future compliance processes
such as the Section 106 process required by the National Historic Preservation Act 16 and
Environmental Impact Statements/Environmental Assessments required by the National
12

The ABPP looks only at the battle-related elements of a cultural landscape. Post-battle elements, while not contributing to the
significance of the battlefield, may be eligible for separate listing in the National Register of Historic Places on their own merits.
Future nominations of battlefield land may take the form of districts (most common), or individual sites within a multiple property
context (appropriate for battlefields with far-flung resources). The ABPP’s survey boundaries do not imply any one approach; they
serve only as a starting point for discussions between the nominating agent and the State Historic Preservation Officer.
14
National Park Service, National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America’s Historic
Battlefields, 1992 , Revised 1999 (http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf), offers recommendations
regarding "Selecting Defensible Boundaries." While this document indicates that "generally, boundaries should not be drawn to
include the portion of the route taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters," the Guidelines also state that "a basic
principle is to include within the boundary all of the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took
actions based on their assumption of being in the presence of the enemy." The ABPP interprets this latter guidance to mean all
military activities that influenced the battle. See the individual battlefield profiles for information about military actions taken along
the routes included. In accordance with the methodology of this study, if routes included in the Study Area retain integrity, they are
included within the Potential National Register boundary for the battlefield landscape.
15
The ABPP’s surveys and PotNR assessments do not constitute formal action on behalf of the office of the National Register of
Historic Places. PotNR assessments are intended for planning purposes only; they do not carry the authority to add, change, or
remove an official listing.
16
16 USC 470f.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama
10
13

Environmental Policy Act.17 Likewise, more detailed research and assessments should take
place when any battlefield is formally nominated to the NRHP or proposed for designation
as a National Historic Landmark (NHL). New research and intensive-level surveys of these
sites will enlighten future preservation and compliance work. Agencies should continue to
consult local and state experts for up-to-date information about these battlefields.
In Alabama, only Fort Blakely has a sizable amount of acreage listed in the NRHP.
Athens and Mobile Bay have NRHP listings representing a fraction of the total Study
Areas of the two battlefields. In addition, Mobile Bay has a National Historic Landmark
designation for Fort Morgan and the USS Tecumseh. At these three battlefields, the ABPP
recommends a PotNR boundary of equal or greater size than the existing NRHP and NHL
boundaries.

Questionnaires
While the ABPP maintains data about its own program activities at Civil War battlefields,
most preservation work occurs at the local level. Therefore, to answer Congress's directive
for information about battlefield preservation activities, the ABPP sought input from local
battlefield managers and advocacy organizations. The ABPP distributed questionnaires
designed to gather information about the types of preservation activities that have taken
place at the battlefields since 1993. The Questionnaire is reproduced in Appendix D
In Alabama, representatives from four organizations responded to ABPP’s inquiries. Their
responses, combined with the survey findings, allowed the ABPP to create a profile of
conditions and activities at Alabama’s Civil War battlefields.
Figure 4. The Richard
Martin National
Recreation Trail, a Rails to
Trails project managed by
Limestone County,
follows the old Tennessee
& Alabama Central
Railroad bed over the
Sulphur Creek Trestle.
Confederate troops under
Nathan Bedford Forrest
attacked a Union fort at
the trestle as part of the
battle of Athens (view
looking south from the
Sulphur Creek Trestle
site). Photograph
courtesy of Limestone
County, 2011.

17

42 USC 4331-4332.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

11

Summary of Conditions of Alabama’s Civil War Battlefields
Quantified Land Areas
Using Geographic Information Systems software, the ABPP calculated the amount of land
historically associated with the battle (Study Area), the amount of land where forces were
engaged (Core Area), and the amount of land that may retain enough integrity to be
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places and that remains to be
protected (Potential National Register boundary).
As noted above, the Study Areas and Core Areas of Alabama’s Civil War battlefields have
been revised in many cases. Particular attention was paid to identifying the routes of
approach and withdrawal associated with each battle, and to identifying areas of
secondary action that influenced the course or outcome of the battles.18 The Study Area
and Core Area boundaries established for each battlefield take these movements and
actions into account, recognizing the extent to which theses ancillary areas serve as
battlefield features.

Table 2. Battlefield Area Statistics
Battlefield
Athens (AL002)
Day’s Gap (AL001))
Decatur (AL004)
Fort Blakely (AL006)
Mobile Bay (AL003)
Selma (AL007)
Spanish Fort (AL005)

Study Area

Core Area

PotNR Boundary

21,919.82
5,410.35
14,623.51
6,061.92
36,916.74
16,158.48
3,742.16

2,274.85
1,084.76
1,148.87
3,743.28
16,130.48
4,631.72
2,282.27

2,998.41
2,933.02
0.00
4,640.71
34,927.42
0.00
0.00

Condition Assessments
Using field survey data, the ABPP assessed the overall condition of each battlefield’s Study
Area. While no battlefield remains completely unaltered since the Civil War, three of
Alabama’s battlefields have retained their character defining features over the past 150
years.19
The landscape at Day’s Gap is in good condition. Portions of the landscape have been
altered, but most essential features remain, particularly those around and within the four
Core Areas. The battlefield is in a rural setting with some light commercial development
and residential construction primarily along the roads. The Day’s Gap landscape is an
excellent opportunity for comprehensive preservation strategies. Additional resource
identification, land protection, and nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) would be appropriate steps in the preservation of this battlefield.
18

National Register Bulletin 40, Guidelines for Identifying, Evaluating, and Registering America's Historic Battlefields
(http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/pdfs/NRB40.pdf), offers recommendations regarding "Selecting Defensible
Boundaries." While this document indicates that "generally, boundaries should not be drawn to include the portion of the route
taken to the battlefield where there were no encounters," the Guidelines also state that "a basic principle is to include within the
boundary all of the locations where opposing forces, either before, during or after the battle, took actions based on their assumption
of being in the presence of the enemy." The ABPP interprets this latter guidance to mean all military activities that influenced the
battle. See the individual battlefield profiles for information about military actions taken along the routes included. In accordance
with the methodology of this study, if routes included in the Study Area retain integrity, they are included within the Potential
National Register boundary for the battlefield landscape.
19
The condition of archeological resources within the battlefields was not assessed. Future studies are needed to determine the
degree of archeological integrity associated with subsurface battle deposits.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama
12

Fort Blakely remains in good condition. Approximately 44 percent of the battlefield is
managed by the Historic Blakely Authority as the Historic Blakeley State Park. An
additional three percent is also protected within the W.L Holland and Mobile-Tensaw
Wildlife Management Areas. The remaining battlefield lands are owned by timber
companies and private individuals. The primary threat to the battlefield is residential and
commercial development. Reevaluation of the existing NRHP documentation and
nomination of the remaining battlefield landscape to the NRHP would be appropriate
preservation actions at Fort Blakely.
While Mobile Bay is in good condition, 92 percent of the Study Area is water. The open
waterways of Mobile Bay remain much as they were at the time of battle. With the
shorelines of Dauphin Island to the west and Mobile Point to the east, any on-looker
approaching the mouth of the bay from the water can appreciate the barrier islands and
their two forts as strong positions of defense. The land portions of the battlefield retain
varying degrees of integrity, with areas around Fort Morgan and Fort Gaines being the
best preserved.
The major threat to the land portion of the battlefield is erosion caused by natural forces
in the Gulf of Mexico and Mobile Bay. In addition, development on Dauphin Island is
beginning to overwhelm what little is left of the landscape. The two primary land-based
defining features of Mobile Bay, Fort Morgan and Fort Gaines, also face serious threats.
The eastern end of Dauphin Island is eroding and beginning to undercut Fort Gaines,
bringing water up and in to the walls of the fort. Fort Morgan suffers from extensive
damage to the brick masonry due to leaching and calcification caused by the elements. If
these threats are not mitigated, both forts will suffer irreversible damage.
The primary threat to submerged resources associated with the battle of Mobile Bay, is
dredging. The USS Tecumseh shipwreck, a National Historic Landmark (NHL), has a
Shipwreck Management Plan to aid in the prevention of adverse affects from dredging.
Other submerged resources such as Fort Powell and the Confederate piling obstructions at
the mouth of the bay have no such protection.20 In addition, natural gas drilling platforms
both within and outside of the bay impact the viewshed from Fort Morgan and Fort
Gaines.
Preservation efforts at Mobile Bay should concentrate on recognition of underwater
resources, mitigation of threats to the two masonry fortifications, reevaluation of the
existing NRHP/NHL documentation, and nomination of the entire battlefield landscape to
the NRHP. Because the majority of the battlefield is water, any future preservation efforts
will need to recognize the bay’s role as a primary feature of the battle.
Athens has been damaged by modern development in and around the city. Other than a
small area in the southernmost part of the battlefield protected within the Swan Creek
Wildlife Management Area, only essential landscape features north of Athens remain
intact. The primary long-term threat to the northern portion of the battlefield is
development. Reevaluation of the existing NRHP documentation and nomination of the
remaining battlefield landscape to the NRHP should be the focus of preservation efforts at
this battlefield.
The three remaining battlefields, Decatur, Selma, and Spanish Fort, have lost all
integrity. The post-Civil War growth of the three cities has destroyed the battlefield

20

West, W. Wilson, Jr., USS Tecumseh Shipwreck Management Plan, Naval Historical Center, Washington D.C., 1996
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

13

landscapes. Although commemorative and public interpretation opportunities exist and
are appropriate, there is no opportunity for meaningful landscape preservation other than
what has already been preserved at these sites.

Table 3: Condition Summary
Condition

Battlefield

Land use is little changed (0)

None

Portions of landscape have been altered, but
most essential features remain (3)

Day’s Gap, Fort Blakely, Mobile Bay

Much of the landscape has been altered and
fragmented, leaving some essential features (1)

Athens

Landscape and terrain have been altered
beyond recognition (3)

Decatur, Selma, Spanish Fort

Figure 5. Dredging and the construction of natural gass drilling platforms in Mobile Bay threaten
underwater archeological sites and disrupt the viewshed of the Mobile Bay battlefield (view
looking north from mouth of bay near Fort Morgan/Mobile Point). Photograph by Kathleen
Madigan, 2009.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

14

Registration
The nation’s official method for recognizing historic properties worthy of preservation is
listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Sites and structures listed in the
NRHP meet national standards for documentation, physical integrity, and demonstrable
significance to the history of our nation. Federal, state, and local agencies use information
from the NRHP as a planning tool to identify and make decisions about cultural resources.
Federal and state laws, most notably Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act
of 1966, require agencies to account for the effects their projects (roads, wetland permits,
quarrying, cell towers, etc.) may have on listed and eligible historic properties, such as
battlefields. Listing allows project designers to quickly identify the battlefield and avoid or
minimize impacts to the landscape.
Properties listed in the NRHP may also be eligible for federal and state historic
preservation grant programs. Recognition as an NRHP listed battlefield can advance public
understanding of and appreciation for the battlefield, and may encourage advocacy for its
preservation.21
Alabama currently has one Civil War battlefield listed in the NRHP as a battlefield
landscape—Fort Blakely. Individual defining features associated with two other battles
are listed seperately – Fort Morgan, Fort Gaines, USS Tecumseh (Mobile Bay), and Sulphur
Creek Trestle (Athens). At all three of these battlefields, the existing documentation does
not express accurately their size or current integrity. The NRHP documentation should be
reevaluated and expanded to include the historic landscapes where the landscape retains
integrity. Because the majority of the Mobile Bay Study Area is water, an expansion of
the NRHP listing will need to recognize the role of Mobile Bay as a contributing feature to
the battlefield.
Fully 54 percent of Days Gap retains integrity; however, no land or features directly
associated with the battle have been listed in the NRHP. The ABPP believes there is
enough integrity within the Study Area to make Day’s Gap potentially eligible for
individual listing in the NRHP as a battlefield landscape.
At Decatur, Selma, and Spanish Fort, the ABPP believes the Study Areas of these
battlefields no longer retain enough integrity to merit listing in the NRHP as battlefield
landscapes.
Table 4 compares the number of battlefield acres already designated or listed at Alabama’s
Civil War battlefields with the number of acres that are likely to meet the same criteria.

21

There are three levels of federal recognition for historic properties: Congressional designations such as national park units,
National Historic Landmarks, and listings in the National Register of Historic Places. Congress creates national park units. The
Secretary of the Interior designates National Historic Landmarks (NHL) – nationally significant historic sites – for their exceptional
value or quality in illustrating or interpreting the heritage of the United States. The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is
the nation’s official list of cultural sites significant at the national, state, or local level and worthy of preservation. Historic units of
the National Park System and NHLs are also listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama
15

Table 4. Acres Registered Compared with Acres Potentially
Eligible to be Registered
Battlefield
Athens (AL002)

NRHP

Day’s Gap (AL001)
Decatur ALS004)

ABPP PotNR
Acres

Existing
Registered
Acres

Acres Potentially
Eligible to be
Registerted

2,998.41

5.05

2,993.36

2,933.02

Designation

0.00

2,933.02

0.00

0.00

0

Fort Blakely (AL006)

NRHP

4,640.71

3,834.00

806.71

Mobile Bay (AL003)

NRHP, NHL*

34,927.42

192.00

34,735.42

Selma (AL007)

0.00

0.00

2,993.36

Spanish Fort (AL005)

0.00

0.00

2,933.02

*The NRHP and NHL designations are for individual properties associated with the battle.

Stewardship
For the purposes of this update, “protected land” means battlefield land that is in public
or private non-profit ownership, or is under permanent protective easement, and is
managed specifically for 1) the purposes of maintaining the historic character of the
landscape and for preventing future impairment or destruction of the landscape and
historic features, or for 2) a conservation purpose and use compatible with the goals of
historic landscape preservation.
The ABPP established this definition because, while public ownership of land often
provides some level of protection for historic resources, it does not necessarily foreclose
the potential for damage. Federal, state, and municipal ownership may prevent private
development, and public ownership may require compliance with state and federal
environmental laws, but the primary uses (military readiness, timber production,
recreation, mineral extraction, impoundment, etc.) of that public land may not be
compatible with the perpetual protection and appropriate management of a battlefield
landscape.
Through fee simple ownership and purchase of development rights, non-profit
organizations, along with local, state, and federal government stewards have permanently
protected more than 4,600 acres of Civil War battlefield land in Alabama. With more than
44 percent of the lands that retain integrity in protective ownership, Fort Blakely is the
best-preserved battlefield in the state. At Day’s Gap and Mobile Bay, less than five
percent of the battlefield lands that retain integrity are protected. It should be noted,
however, that the Mobile Bay battlefield is composed primarily of water. At Athens, a
small percentage of the battlefield is protected within a wildlife management area. While
the ABPP did not assign PotNR boundaries to Decatur and Spanish Fort, fragments of
those landscapes are in protective ownership. There is no protected land at Selma.
The majority of protected Civil War battlefield land in Alabama is held by three state
agencies – the Alabama Historical Commission, the Alabama Department of Conservation
and Natural Resources (ADCNR), and the Historic Blakeley Authority. These agencies
protect more than 3,500 acres of battlefield land at Fort Morgan State Historic Site
(Mobile Bay), the Mobile-Tensaw Delta Wildlife Management Area (Fort Blakely and
Spanish Fort), the WL Holland Wildlife Management Area (Fort Blakely), the Swan
Creek Wildlife Management Area (Athens and Decatur), and Historic Blakeley State Park
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

16

(Fort Blakely). In addition, the ADCNR’s Forever Wild Land Trust protects 420 acres that
are managed by the Historic Blakeley Authority as part of Historic Blakeley State Park. 22
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service manages more than 1,900 acres of battlefield land at
Wheeler National Wildlife Refuge (Decatur) and Bon Secour Wildlife Management Area
(Mobile Bay). Although battlefield lands at these two Wildlife Refuges are not reserved
for their association with historic events, they are considered by the ABPP to be protected.
The conservation mission of the Wildlife Reguge system is compatible with the goals of
historic landscape preservation.
In Alabama, one local government plays a small but significant role as a battlefield
landowner and steward. The Dauphin Island Park and Beach Board protects 184 acres of
land at Historic Fort Gaines and the Dauphin Island Audubon Bird Sanctuary (Mobile Bay).
In addition, Fort Gaines – a primary defining feature of the battlefield – is preserved and
interpreted for its role in the battle of Mobile Bay.
Finally, in partnership with the National Park Service, other nonprofit organizations, and
local communities, the Civil War Preservation Trust has supported preservation efforts at
Fort Blakely and Day’s Gap.
Landscape preservation efforts in other states have benefited greatly from the purchase of
development rights in the form of conservation easements. Used in conjunction with or
instead of a traditional fee simple purchase, conservation easements are one of the most
successful preservation and stewardship tools available for protecting battlefields. This
type of easement allows private property owners to keep their land while receiving federal
income tax credits for donating the easement, and is becoming increasingly popular with
landowners who want to restrict the future development of their property. Preservation
advocates need to combine forces with land trusts and willing sellers to apply this
powerful tool at Civil War battlefields in Alabama.
For each battlefield, Table 5 compares the amount of land permanently protected against
the total amount of land that has integrity but remains unprotected.23 This information
may serve planners and preservation advocates as a tool for prioritizing future
preservation initiatives.

Table 5. Protective Stewardship of Intact Battlefield Land
Battlefield
Athens (AL002)
Day’s Gap (AL001)
Decatur (AL004)
Fort Blakely(AL006)
Mobile Bay (AL003)*
Selma (AL007)
Spanish Fort (AL005)

Permanently
Protected Acres

ABPP PotNR
Acres

Unprotected, Intact
Acres Remaining

553.82
40
1,657.66
2,167.31
949.98
0
358.8

2,998.41
2,933.02
0
4,640.71
34,927.42
0
0

2,444.59
2,893.02
0
2,473.40
33,977.44
0
0

*The majority of Mobile Bay’s unprotected, intact acres are water.
22

Forever Wild Land Trust, a state land acquisition program, was enacted in 1992. To date the program has purchased and
protected over 280,000 acres of land in Alabama. While the land acquired through this program is intended for general recreation,
nature preserves, and additions to Wildlife Management Areas and state parks, Forever Wild Land Trust’s conservation goals and
land use policies are considered compatible with the goals of historic landscape preservation.
23
The ABPP culled information about permanently protected lands from questionnaire respondents, numerous partner
organizations, and state and Federal GIS datasets. The data is not necessarily complete but provides an approximate idea of the
amount of land protected at each battlefield as of 2011.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama
17

Public Access and Interpretation
In its questionnaire (see Appendix D), the ABPP asked battlefield stewards about the types of
public access and interpretation available at the battlefields. The ABPP did not collect
information about the purpose or intent of the interpretation and access, such as whether
development of a wayside exhibit was for purely educational reasons, to promote heritage
tourism, or to boost local economic development
The ABPP asked respondents to indicate the type of interpretation available at or about the
battlefield. The categories included brochures, driving tours, living history demonstrations,
maintained historic features or areas, walking tours and trails, wayside exhibits, websites, and
other specialized programs. The results, summarized in the Individual Battlefield Profiles,
indicate that three of Alabama’s seven Civil War battlefields offer public access and facilities
specifically dedicated to the interpretation of the battlefield landscape and two offer some
level of interpretation pertaining to the battle.

Table 6: Interpretation Summary
On-site Interpretation

Battlefield

Battlefields with public interpretation, including
visitors center (2)

Fort Blakely (AL006), Mobile Bay (AL003)

Battlefields with public interpretation, but no
visitors center (4)

Athens (AL002), Day’s Gap (AL001),
Decatur (AL004), Spanish Fort (AL005)

Battlefields with no public interpretation (1)

Selma (AL007)

Figure 6. The City of Decatur was
razed before the battle of Decatur
to allow a clear field of fire from
Union fortifications. Today only
four buildings remain in Decatur
from the time of the battle, among
them the old State Bank (shown in
the background). The DecaturMorgan County Convention and
Visitors Bureau interprets the battle
through a Civil War walking tour,
accompanying brochure, and
interpretive signs. Photograph by
Matthew Borders, 2009.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

18

Advocacy
Nonprofit organizations play important roles in protecting historic battlefields. These
organizations step in to preserve historic sites when public funding and management for
historic preservation are absent. When public funding is available, nonprofits serve as vital
partners in public-private preservation efforts, acting as conduits for public funds, raising
critical private matching funds, keeping history and preservation in the public eye, and
working with landowners to find ways to protect battlefield parcels.
Three of Alabama’s seven Civil War battlefields have active nonprofit advocates – Fort
Blakely, Mobile Bay, and Selma. The Historic Blakely Foundation promotes the
historical and cultural aspects of the battlefield and works to preserve lands associated
with the battle of Fort Blakely. At Mobile Bay, the Friends of Fort Morgan provides
support to the Fort Morgan State Historic Site and advocates for the battlefield in the local
community. A new group, the April 1865 Society, has been formed to promote the battle
of Selma. The group is currently advocating for historical markers to be placed around
the city to interpret the battle.
While other organizations with more general historical interests may also play important
roles in preserving Alabama’s battlefields, these groups are the only known local
organizations in Alabama that have been dedicated solely to the goals of battlefield
preservation, interpretation, and promotion of these resources.
Like many other states, Alabama is promoting the Civil War sesquicentennial for public
education, community development, and heritage tourism. In October 2010, Alabama
launched a statewide partnership for the commemoration of the Creek War, the Civil War
sesquicentennial, and the Civil Rights movement called Becoming Alabama. As part of this
effort, the Alabama Tourism Department has published an Alabama Civil War Trails
brochure highlighting the state’s Civil War battlefields and associated properties.24
Figure 7. The Historic
Blakely Foundation,
with assistance from an
American Battlefield
Protection Program
Civil War Battlefield
Land Acquisition Grant,
helped acquire and
preserve lands
associated with the
battle of Fort Blakely.
Photograph courtesy of
Historic Blakeley State
Park, 2011.

24

Alabama Civil War Trails brochure, http://www.800alabama.com/media-room/brochures/
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

19

Individual Battlefield Profiles
Battlefield Profile Glossary
Location

County or city in which the battlefield is located.

Campaign

Name of military campaign of which the battle was part. Campaign
names are taken from The War of the Rebellion: a Compilation of the
Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies.

Battle Date(s)

Day or days upon which the battle took place, as determined by the Civil
War Sites Advisory Commission.

Principal Commanders Ranking commanders of opposing forces during the battle.
Forces Engaged

Name or description of largest units engaged during the battle.

Results

Indicates battle victor or inconclusive outcome.

Study Area

Acres within the Study Area, as determined by the ABPP, that represent
the historic extent of the battle upon the landscape.

Potential National
Register Lands

Acres of land that retain historic character and may be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by
ABPP.

Protected Lands

Estimated acreage (based on questionnaires and analysis using GIS
software) of battlefield land that is in public or private non-profit
ownership, or is under permanent protective easement, and is managed
specifically for 1) the purposes of maintaining the historic character of
the landscape and for preventing future impairment or destruction of
the landscape and historic features, or for 2) a conservation purpose and
use compatible with the goals of historic landscape preservation.

Publicly Accessible
Lands

Estimated acres (based on responses to questionnaires) maintained
for public visitation.

Management Area

Name of historic site, park, or other area maintained for resource
protection and/or public visitation.

Friends Group(s)

Name of local advocacy organization(s) that support preservation
activities at/for the battlefield.

Preservation
Activities
Since 1993

Indicates which types of preservation activities have taken place at
the battlefield since 1993 (based on responses to questionnaires).

Public
Interpretation
Since 1993

Indicates which types of interpretation/educational activities have
taken place at the battlefield since 1993 (based on
responses to questionnaires).

Condition Statement The ABPP’s assessment of the overall condition of the battlefield’s
Study Area (based on field surveys and responses to questionnaires).
Historical Designation Notes the most prestigious historical designation the battlefield has
received (i.e. national park unit, National Historic Landmark, or
National Register of Historic Places).
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

20

Athens (AL002)
Location

Limestone County; Morgan County; Giles County, TN

Campaign

Forrest’s Raid in Northern Alabama and Middle Tennessee

Battle Date(s)

September 23-25, 1864

Principal Commanders

Colonel Wallace Campbell, Lieutenant Colonel Jonas Elliott,
Colonel W. H. Lathrop, Colonel George Spalding [US]; Major
General Nathan Bedford Forrest [CS]

Forces Engaged

110th USCT, 102th Ohio Infantry (detachment), 18th Michigan
Infantry (detachment), 111th USCT, 4th Cavalry Division [US];
Cavalry Corps, Department of Alabama, Mississippi, and East
Louisiana [CS]

Results

Confederate victory

Study Area

21,919.82 acres
The ABPP expanded the 1993 Study Area slightly around Athens to
allow for troop movements. The Study Area around McDonald
Station (modern day town of Tanner) was expanded to include
skirmishing between Confederate cavalry and the USCT. The ABPP
removed part of the Study Area to the northwest of Athens where
there was no activity and also removed the Confederate withdrawal
route to the northeast of Sulpher Creek Trestle as it did not have any
bearing on the battle. The approach route to the southwest of
Athens from Brown's Ferry on the Tennessee River to the town of Reid
was also removed. This route was associated with the January 1864
battle.
The 1993 Core Areas were expanded slightly to include all combat
maneuvers associated with both the action in Athens and the action
at Sulphur Creek Trestle.

Potential National
Register Lands

2,998.37 acres

Protected Lands

553.82
Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Swan
Creek Wildlife Management Area, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

566.02 acres
Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Swan
Creek Wildlife Management Area, 553.82 acres
Limestone County Parks and Recreation, Richard Martin National
Recreation Trail,10.20 acres
Athens-Limestone Community Association, Fort Henderson Historic
Site, 2.00 acres

Management Area(s)

Fort Henderson Historic Site
Richard Martin National Recreation Trail
Swan Creek Wildlife Management Area

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

21

Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation
Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
http://www.visitathensal.com/3/miscellaneous3.htm

Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
Other
Condition Statement

Much of the landscape has been altered and fragmented, but
some essential features remain.
Athens has been damaged by modern development in and
around the city. Other than a small area in the southernmost part
of the battlefield protected within the Swan Creek Wildlife
Management Area, only essential landscape features north of
Athens remain intact. The primary long-term threat to the
northern portion of the battlefield is development. Reevaluation
of the existing NRHP documentation and nomination of the
remaining battlefield landscape to the NRHP should be the focus
of preservation efforts at this battlefield.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Sulphur Trestle Fort Site, 1973)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

22

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

23

Day’s Gap (AL001)
Location

Cullman County; Morgan County

Campaign

Streight’s Raid in Alabama and Georgia (1863)

Battle Date(s)

April 30, 1863

Principal Commanders

Colonel Abel Streight [US]; Brigadier General Nathan Bedford
Forrest [CS]

Forces Engaged

Elements of the 51st Indiana Infantry, 73rd Indiana Infantry, 3rd Ohio
Infantry, 80th Illinois Infantry, and the 1st Middle Tennessee Cavalry
(5th Tennessee Volunteer Cavalry Regiment) [US]; Cavalry Corps,
Department of Alabama, Mississippi, and East Louisiana [CS]

Results

Confederate Victory

Study Area

5,410.35 acres
The ABPP expanded the 1993 Study Area to include the Federal
encampment north of Day's Gap; the point at which Forrest realized
the Federal’s were in close proximity and organized his attack; the
actual area of fighting at Day's Gap; and the engagement areas at
Crooked Creek/Hog Mountain, Bethsaida Church, and Ryan Creek.
The ABPP also connected the discontiguous 1993 Study Areas into one
Study Area representing the full extent of the action associated with
Day’s Gap and the entire route of chase from initial contact to the
point of disengagement at Johnson's Crossing the night of April 30th.
The 1993 Day's Gap Core Area was moved slightly to the west and on
top of the ridgeline, which more closely matches reports found in the
War of the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official Records of the
Union and Confederate Armies. The Core Area at Hog Mountain was
expanded to include the full battle of Crooked Creek/Hog Mountain.
Core Areas were also added at Bethsaida Church and Ryan's Creek.
These were the last actions of the day before Forrest broke off chase
for the night and allowed Streight to move on to Blountsville.

Potential National
Register Lands

2,933.02 acres

Protected Lands

40.00 acres,
Civil War Trust, Hog Mountain, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

20.00 acres,
Crooked Creek Civil War Museum and Park (private ownership)

Management Area(s)

Crooked Creek Civil War Museum and Park
Hog Mountain

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

24

Planning Projects
Research and Documentation
Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
http://www.co.cullman.al.us/history2.htm

Other
Condition Statement

Portions of landscape have been altered, but most essential
features remain.
The landscape at Day’s Gap is in good condition. The battlefield
is in a rural setting with some light commercial development and
residential construction primarily along the roads. Day’s Gap
remains an excellent opportunity for comprehensive landscape
preservation. Additional resource identification, land protection,
and nomination to the NRHP would be appropriate steps in the
preservation of this battlefield.

Historical Designation

None

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

25

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

26

Decatur (AL004)
Location

Lawrence County; Limestone County; Morgan County

Campaign

Franklin – Nashville Campaign (1864)

Battle Date(s)

October 26 - 29, 1864

Principal Commanders

Brigadier General Robert S. Granger [US]; General John Bell Hood [CS]

Forces Engaged

Garrison at Decatur; US Army Gunboat Stone River, USS General
Thomas; detachments of 102 Ohio Infantry, 18th Michigan
Infantry, 13th Wisconsin Infantry, 14th US Colored Infantry, 73rd
Indiana Infantry, 68th Indiana Infantry, and 13th Indiana Cavalry
[US]; Army of Tennessee [CS]

Results

Confederate victory

Study Area

14,623.51 acres
The CWSAC did not assign boundaries to this battlefield in 1993.
The new Study Area boundary reflects the 1864 boundaries of the
Tennessee River before the river was dammed to form Wheeler Lake.
The boundary incorporates the Confederate approach down three
main roads (Courtland, Moulton, and Sommerville) and Federal
cavalry moving and skirmishing for 12 miles along the Sommerville
Road. Included in the Study Area boundary are Confederate
encampments; Confederate earthworks and 14-gun battery; Federal
fortifications and advanced rifle pits and earthworks; a Federal
battery on the north side of the Tennessee River; the Federal boats'
advance from Limestone Creek and actions against the 14-gun
battery; Federal reinforcements’ approach routes from Athens and
Huntsville; and Federal patrol routes along the Tennessee River from
Decatur to Brown's Ferry.
The ABPP also delineated two new Core Areas. The smaller of the two
Core Areas represents the first major action of the battle – a larger
skirmish between Confederate and Federal cavalries along the
Sommerville Road. The larger of the two Core Areas encompasses the
battlefield from the ravine (Dry Branch Creek) to the Tennessee River
(c. 1864) to include fields of fire, actions on the Federal right and left,
actions across the open fields, the Federal battery and boats' actions
against the Confederate 14-gun battery, and the 14th USCT action to
take the Confederate battery on the Federal left.

Potential National
Register Lands

0.00 acres

Protected Lands

1,657.66 acres
US Fish and Wildlife Service, Wheeler National Wildlife Refuge,
1,329.47 acres, fee simple
Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Swan
Creek Wildlife Management Area, 328.19 acres, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

1,664.66 acres
US Fish and Wildlife Service, Wheeler National Wildlife Refuge,
1,329.47 acres
Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Swan
Creek Wildlife Management Area, 328.19 acres
Decatur Parks and Recreation, Rhodes Ferry Park, 7.00 acres

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

27

Management Area(s)

Rhodes Ferry Park
Swan Creek Wildlife Management Area
Wheeler National Wildlife Refuge

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation
Other

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
http://www.decaturcvb.org/images/brochures/Decatur_Civl_War_Tour.pdf

Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
Other
Condition Statement

Landscape and terrain have been altered beyond recognition.
Decatur has lost integrity as an historic landscape. The rebuilding
and growth of the City of Decatur since the Civil War has
destroyed the battlefield. Although there is no opportunity for
meaningful landscape preservation, commemorative and
interpretive opportunities are possible and appropriate.

Historical Designation

None

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

28

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

29

Fort Blakely (AL006)
Location

Baldwin County

Campaign

Mobile Campaign

Battle Date(s)

April 2 - 9, 1865

Principal Commanders

Major General E.R.S. Canby [US]; Brigadier General St. John R.
Liddell [CS]

Forces Engaged

Army of West Mississippi [US]; Fort Blakely Garrison, CSS
Huntsville, CSS Nashville, CSS Morgan [CS]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

6,061.92 acres
The ABPP expanded the 1993 Study and Core Areas to include the
Blakely and Tensaw Rivers and the Confederate ships' actions to
support the fort. Also added were fields of fire from the Federal
batteries north of Spanish Fort. Federal approach routes from the
east and south were added to the Study Area and the approach route
from Spanish Fort was widened across Bay Minette to reflect the
military’s need for multiple crossing points.

Potential National
Register Lands

4,640.65 acres

Protected Lands

2,020.00 acres
Historic Bakeley Authority, 1,600.00 acres, fee simple
Forever Wild Land Trust, 420.00 acres, fee simple
Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources,
147.31 acres

Publicly Accessible Lands

2,167.31 acres
Historic Bakeley Authority, Historic Blakeley State Park
1,600.00 acres
Forever Wild Land Trust, Blakeley Addition Tract, 420.00 acres
Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, W.L.
Holland Wildlife Management Area, 78.25 acres
Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, MobileTensaw Delta Wildlife Management Area, 69.06 acres

Management Area(s)

Historic Blakeley State Park
Mobile-Tensaw Delta Wildlife Management Area
W.L. Holland Wildlife Management Area

Friends Group(s)

Historic Blakeley Foundation

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation
Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

30

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website:
http://www.blakeleypark.com

Other
Condition Statement

Portions of the landscape have been altered, but most essential
features remain.
Fort Blakely remains in relatively good condition. Approximately
44 percent of the battlefield is managed by the Historic Blakely
Foundation as the Historic Blakeley State Park. An additional
three percent is also protected within the W.L Holland and
Mobile-Tensaw Wildlife Management Areas. The remaining
battlefield lands are owned by timber companies and private
individuals. The primary threat to the battlefield is residential and
commercial development. Reevaluation of the existing NRHP
documentation and nomination of the remaining battlefield
landscape to the NRHP would be appropriate preservation actions
at Fort Blakely.

Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Blakeley, 1974)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

31

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

32

Mobile Bay (AL003)
Location

Mobile County; Baldwin County

Campaign

Operations in Mobile Bay (1864)

Battle Date(s)

August 2 - 23, 1864

Principal Commanders

Rear Admiral David G. Farragut, Major General Gordon Granger [US];
Admiral Franklin Buchanan, Major General Dabney H. Maury [CS]

Forces Engaged

West Gulf Blockading Squadron and U.S. Army forces near Mobile [US];
Buchanan’s Flotilla (CSS Tennessee, gunboats Selma, Morgan and Gaines),
Fort Morgan garrison, Fort Gaines garrison, and Fort Powell garrison [CS].

Results

Union victory

Study Area

36,916.74 acres
The 1993 Study Area was adjusted to conform to the bathometric
maps of Mobile Bay and contours of the islands at the time of the
engagement. It was expanded to the northwest to include the
bombardment of Fort Powell by the West Gulf Blockading Squadron
gunboats and the ironclad Chickasaw, and west along Dauphin Island
to include the landing areas of Granger's infantry and artillery.
The 1993 Core Area was expanded around Fort Gaines and Fort
Morgan to include the full range of the naval and land-based gun
bombardment of those fortifications. Also included was the
bombardment of Fort Powell. The Core Area was expanded north of
Fort Morgan to include the action against the Confederate gunboat
Selma, and the full extent of Farragut's fight with the CSS Tennessee.

Potential National
Register Lands

34,927.42 acres

Protected Lands

949.98 acres
U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 637.49 acres, fee simple
Dauphin Island Park and Beach Board, 184.76 acres, fee simple
Alabama Historical Commission, 127.73 acres, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

949.98 acres
U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Bon Secour National Wildlife Refuge,
637.49 acres
Dauphin Island Park and Beach Board, Dauphin Island Audubon Bird
Sanctuary, 160.00 acres
Alabama Historical Commission, Fort Morgan State Historic Site,
127.73 acres
Dauphin Island Park and Beach Board, Fort Gaines Municipal Park,
24.76 acres

Management Area(s)

Bon Secour National Wildlife Refuge
Dauphin Island Audubon Bird Sanctuary
Fort Morgan State Historic Site
Historic Fort Gaines

Friends Group(s)

Friends of Fort Morgan

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

33

Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation
Other
Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website:
http://www.azaleacity.com/fortmorgan/information.htm
http://www.dauphinisland.org/fort.htm

Other
Condition Statement

Portions of the landscape have been altered, but most essential
features remain.
Ninety-two percent of the Mobile Bay Study Area is
water. The open waterways of Mobile Bay remain much
as they were at the time of battle. With the shorelines of
Dauphin Island to the west and Mobile Point to the east,
any on-looker approaching the mouth of the bay from the
water can appreciate the barrier islands and their two
forts as strong positions of defense. The land portions of
the battlefield retain varying degrees of integrity, with
areas around Fort Morgan and Fort Gaines being the best
preserved.

Standing seawater inside the walls of Fort Gaines.
Photograph by Matthew Borders 2009.

Leaching and calcification are beginning to
damage severely Fort Morgan’s brick masonry.
Photograph by Kathleen Madigan 2009.
25

The major threat to the land portion of the battlefield is
erosion caused by natural forces in the Gulf of Mexico and
Mobile Bay. In addition, development on Dauphin Island
is beginning to overwhelm what little is left of the
landscape. The two primary land-based defining features
of Mobile Bay, Fort
Morgan and Fort Gaines, also face serious threats. The
eastern end of Dauphin Island is eroding and beginning to
undercut Fort Gaines, bringing water up and in to the
walls of the fort. Fort Morgan suffers from extensive
damage to the brick masonry due to leaching and
calcification caused by the elements. If these threats are
not mitigated, both forts will suffer irreversible damage.
The primary threat to submerged resources associated with
the battle of Mobile Bay, is dredging. The USS Tecumseh
shipwreck, a National Historic Landmark (NHL), has a
Shipwreck Management Plan to aid in the prevention of
adverse affe cts from dredging. Other submerged resources
such as Fort Powell and the Confederate piling obstructions
at the mouth of the bay have no such protection.25

West, W. Wilson, Jr., USS Tecumseh Shipwreck Management Plan, Naval Historical Center, Washington D.C., 1996
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

34

In addition, natural gas drilling platforms both within and outside of
the bay impact the viewshed from Fort Morgan and Fort Gaines.
Preservation efforts at Mobile Bay should concentrate on
recognition of underwater resources, mitigation of threats to the
two masonry fortifications, reevaluation of the existing NRHP/NHL
documentation, and nomination of the entire battlefield landscape
to the NRHP. Because the majority of the battlefield is water, any
future preservation efforts will need to recognize the bay’s role as a
primary feature of the battle.
Historical Designation

National Register of Historic Places (Fort Gaines, 1976)
National Register of Historic Places (U.S.S. Tecumseh, 1975)
National Historic Landmark (Fort Morgan, 1966)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

35

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

36

Selma (AL007)
Location

Dallas County

Campaign

Wilson’s Raid in Alabama and Georgia (1865))

Battle Date(s)

April 2, 1865

Principal Commanders

Major General James H. Wilson [US]; Lieutenant General Nathan B.
Forrest [CS]

Forces Engaged

Cavalry Corps, Military Division of the Mississippi [US]; Cavalry
Corps, Department of Alabama, Mississippi, and East Louisiana;
General Daniel W. Adams' state reserves; citizens of Selma who
volunteered to man the defenses [CS]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

16,158.29 acres
The 1993 Study Area was expanded to the north to include Federal
troop movements, engagement areas, and routes of approach. Also
included was the Confederate withdrawl route to the east towards
Burnsville, and the flight across the Alabama River to the southwest.
The 1993 Core Area was expanded to the north and east to include
fields of fire and areas of fighting outside of the Confederate
fortifications.

Potential National
Register Lands

0.00 acres

Protected Lands

0.00 acres

Publicly Accessible Lands

0.00 acres

Management Area(s)

None

Friends Group(s)

April 1865 Society

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation
Other

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
Other

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

37

Condition Statement

Landscape and terrain have been altered beyond recognition.
Selma has lost integrity as an historic landscape. The growth of
the City of Selma since the Civil War has destroyed the battlefield.
Although there is no opportunity for meaningful landscape
preservation, commemorative and interpretive opportunities are
possible and appropriate.

Historical Designation

None

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

38

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

39

Spanish Fort (AL005)
Location

Baldwin County

Campaign

Mobile Campaign (1865)

Battle Date(s)

March 27 - April 8, 1865

Principal Commanders

Major General E.R.S. Canby [US]; Brigadier General Randall L. Gibson [CS]

Forces Engaged

Army of West Mississippi [US]; Spanish Fort garrison [CS]

Results

Union victory

Study Area

3,742.16 acres
The ABPP expanded the 1993 Study and Core Areas to the northwest
to include fields of fire from Forts Tracy and Huger (CSA). In addition,
the Study and Core Areas were expanded to the south-southeast to
include the Union hospital, headquarters, and earthworks. A small
amount of the Core Area was removed on the southwest edge to
follow better the 1865 shoreline.

Potential National
Register Lands

0.00 acres

Protected Lands

347.22 acres
Mobile-Tensaw Delta Wildlife Management Area, fee simple

Publicly Accessible Lands

347.22 acres
Mobile-Tensaw Delta Wildlife Management Area

Management Area(s)

Mobile-Tensaw Delta Wildlife Management Area

Friends Group(s)

None

Preservation Activities
Since 1993

Advocacy
Cultural Resource Surveys and Inventories
Fundraising
Interpretation Projects
Land or Development Rights Purchased
Legislation
Planning Projects
Research and Documentation
Other

Public Interpretation
Since 1993

Brochure(s)
Driving Tour
Living History
Maintained Historic Features/Areas
Visitor Center
Walking Tour/Trails
Wayside Exhibits/Signs
Website
Other

Condition Statement

Landscape and terrain have been altered beyond recognition.
Spanish Fort has lost integrity as an historic landscape. The
growth of the town of Spanish Fort has destroyed the battlefield.

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

40

Although there is no opportunity for meaningful landscape
preservation, commemorative and interpretive opportunities are
possible and appropriate.
Historical Designation

None

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

41

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

42

Appendices
Appendix A. Civil War Battlefield Land Acquisition Grants
The Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002 (PL 107-359) amended the American
Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 USC 469k) to authorize a matching grant program to
assist States and local communities in acquiring significant Civil War battlefield lands for
permanent protection. Most recently, Congress showed its continued support for these
grants through its reauthorization of this program within the Omnibus Public Land
Management Act of 2009 (PL 111-11).
Eligible battlefields are those listed in the 1993 Report on the Nation’s Civil War
Battlefields prepared by the Congressionally chartered Civil War Sites Advisory Commission
(CWSAC). Eligible acquisition projects may be for fee interest in land or for a protective
interest such as a perpetual easement.
Since 1998, Congress has appropriated a total of $38.9 million for this Civil War Battlefield
Land Acquisition Grants (CWBLAG) Program. These grants have assisted in the permanent
protection of more than 16,600 acres at 67 Civil War battlefields in 14 states. To date,
$84,100 has been used at Fort Blakely to protect permanently 67.28 acres. Given the
remarkable success of battlefield land and easement acquisition in other states, these
grants can help protect historic lands at Athens, Day’s Gap, and Fort Blakely in the
future.
Although all of the battlefields listed in this update are eligible to apply for CWBLAG
funding, applications to protect land that retains integrity (within PotNR boundaries) will
be the most competitive.

Battlefield

CWSAC
Priority

Acres
Acquired

Fort Blakely

3

67.28

CWBLAG
Funds

Total
Non-Federal
Leveraged Funds

Total
Acquisition

$84,100.00

$85,055.00

$169,155.00

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

43

Appendix B. American Battlefield Protection Program Planning Grants

Since 1992, ABPP has offered annual planning grants to nonprofit organizations, academic
institutions, and local, regional, state, and tribal governments to help protect battlefields
located on American soil. Applicants are encouraged to work with partner organizations
and federal, state, and local government agencies as early as possible to integrate their
efforts into a larger battle site protection strategy. ABPP has awarded $87,612.00 to
Alabama’s Civil War battlefields.

Grantee

Year

Project Title

Amount

Alabama Historical Commission

2007

Fort Morgan Masonry Condition
and Repairs Assessment

$37,800.00

Alabama Historical Commission

1994

Mobile Bay Plan

$25,000.00

Alabama Historical Commission

1992

Fort Morgan Archeological
Research and Conference

East Carolina University

1992

Survey Shipwrecks at Mobile Bay
Total

$5,500.00

$19,312.00
$87,612.00

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

44

Appendix C. Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002
Public Law 107-359, 111 Stat. 3016, 17 December 2002
Amends the American Battlefield Protection Program Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k)

An Act
To amend the American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior
to establish a battlefield acquisition grant program.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ``Civil War Battlefield Preservation Act of 2002''.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
(a) Findings.--Congress finds the following
(1) Civil War battlefields provide a means for the people of
the United States to understand a tragic period in the history
of the United States.
(2) According to the Report on the Nation's Civil War
Battlefields, prepared by the Civil War Sites Advisory
Commission, and dated July 1993, of the 384 principal Civil War
battlefields-(A) almost 20 percent are lost or fragmented;
(B) 17 percent are in poor condition; and
(C) 60 percent have been lost or are in imminent
danger of being fragmented by development and lost as
coherent historic sites.
(b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-(1) to act quickly and proactively to preserve and protect
nationally significant Civil War battlefields through
conservation easements and fee-simple purchases of those
battlefields from willing sellers; and
(2) to create partnerships among State and local
governments, regional entities, and the private sector to
preserve, conserve, and enhance nationally significant Civil War
battlefields.
SEC. 3. BATTLEFIELD ACQUISITION GRANT PROGRAM.
The American Battlefield Protection Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 469k) is amended-(1) by redesignating subsection (d) as paragraph (3) of
subsection (c), and indenting appropriately;
(2) in paragraph (3) of subsection (c) (as redesignated by
paragraph (1))-(A) by striking ``Appropriations'' and inserting
``appropriations''; and
(B) by striking ``section'' and inserting
``subsection'';
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

45

(3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following
``(d) Battlefield Acquisition Grant Program.-``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection
``(A) Battlefield report.--The term `Battlefield
Report' means the document entitled `Report on the
Nation's Civil War Battlefields', prepared by the Civil
War Sites Advisory Commission, and dated July 1993.
``(B) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity'
means a State or local government.
``(C) Eligible site.--The term `eligible site' means
a site-``(i) that is not within the exterior
boundaries of a unit of the National Park System;
and
``(ii) that is identified in the Battlefield
Report.
``(D) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the
Secretary of the Interior, acting through the American
Battlefield Protection Program.
``(2) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a
battlefield acquisition grant program under which the Secretary
may provide grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share
of the cost of acquiring interests in eligible sites for the
preservation and protection of those eligible sites.
``(3) Nonprofit partners.--An eligible entity may acquire an
interest in an eligible site using a grant under this subsection
in partnership with a nonprofit organization.
``(4) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the total
cost of acquiring an interest in an eligible site under this
subsection shall be not less than 50 percent.
``(5) Limitation on land use.--An interest in an eligible
site acquired under this subsection shall be subject to section
6(f)(3) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16
U.S.C. 460l-8(f)(3)).
``(6) Reports.-``(A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the
date of the enactment of this subparagraph, the
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the
activities carried out under this subsection.
``(B) Update of battlefield report.--Not later than
2 years after the date of the enactment of this
subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a
report that updates the Battlefield Report to reflect-``(i) preservation activities carried out at
the 384 battlefields during the period between
publication of the Battlefield Report and the
update;
``(ii) changes in the condition of the
battlefields during that period; and
``(iii) any other relevant developments
relating to the battlefields during that period.
``(7) Authorization of appropriations.-``(A) In general.--There are authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary from the Land and Water
Conservation Fund to provide grants under this
subsection $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004
through 2008.
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

46

``(B) Update of battlefield report.--There are
authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry
out paragraph (6)(B), $500,000.''; and
(4) in subsection (e)-(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``as of'' and all
that follows through the period and inserting ``on
September 30, 2008.''; and
(B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and provide
battlefield acquisition grants'' after ``studies''.

-end-

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

47

Appendix D. Battlefield Questionnaire
State
Battlefield
Person Completing Form
Date of completion

I. Protected Lands of the Battlefield (“Protected lands” are these “owned” for historic
preservation or conservation purposes. Please provide information on land protected since 1993.)
Identify protected lands by parcel since 1993. Then answer these questions about each parcel,
following example in the chart below. What is the acreage of each parcel? Is parcel owned fee
simple, by whom? Is there is an easement, if so name easement holder? Was the land purchased or
the easement conveyed after 1993? What was cost of purchase or easement? What was source of
funding and the amount that source contributed? Choose from these possible sources: Coin money,
LWCF, Farm Bill, State Government, Local Government, Private Owner, Private Non-Profit (provide
name), or Other (describe).
Parcel

Acres Owner

Easement Year

Cost

Source

Joe Smith Farm

194

Private

SHPO

1995

$500,000

LWCF/$250,000
Private/$250,000

Sue Jones Tract

16

Battlefield Friends, Inc. No

2002

$41,000

State/$20,000
BFI/$21,000

2) Other public or non-profit lands within the battlefield? (Y/N)
•

If yes, describe

•

Name of public or non-profit owner or easement holder

•

Number of Acres owned/held

3) Is the information in a GIS? (Y/N)
If yes, may NPS obtain a copy of the data? (Y/N)

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

48

II. Preservation Groups
1) Is there a formal interested entity (friends group, etc) associated with the battlefield? (Y/N)
If yes
Name
Address
Phone
Fax
E-mail
Web site? (Y/N)
If yes, what is the URL?
Does the web site have a preservation message? (Y/N)
What year did the group form?

III. Public Access and Interpretation
1) Does the site have designated Public Access? (Y/N) (Count public roads if there are designated
interpretive signs or pull-offs)
If yes, what entity provides the public access (Access may occur on lands owned in fee or under
easement to the above entities)
Federal government
State government
Local government

Private Nonprofit organization
Private owner
Other

Name of entity (if applicable)
Number of Acres Accessible to the Public (size of the area in which the public may physically visit
without trespassing. Do not include viewsheds.)

2) Does the site have interpretation? (Y/N)
If yes, what type of interpretation is available?
Visitor Center
Brochure(s)
Wayside exhibits
Driving Tour
Walking Tour

Audio tour tapes
Maintained historic features/areas
Living History
Website
Other

IV. Registration
Applies only to the battlefield landscape, not to individual contributing features of a battlefield
(i.e., the individually listed Dunker Church property of .2 acres does not represent the Antietam
battlefield for the purposes of this exercise)
1) Is the site a designated National Historic Landmark? (Y/N)
If yes, NHL and ID Number
2) Is the site listed in the National Register? (Y/N)
If yes, NRHP Name and ID Number
3) Is the site listed in the State Register? (Y/N)
If yes, State Register Name and ID Number
Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

49

4) Is the site in the State Inventory? (Y/N)
If yes, State Inventory Name and ID Number
5)

Is the site designated as a local landmark or historic site? (Y/N)
Type of Designation/Listing

V. Program Activities
What types of preservation program activities have occurred at the battlefield? Provide final
product name and date if applicable (e.g., Phase I Archeological Survey Report on the Piper Farm,
1994 and Antietam Preservation Plan, 2001, etc.)
1) Research and Documentation

2) Cultural Resource surveys and inventories (building/structure and landscape inventories,
archeological surveys, landscape surveys, etc.)

3) Planning Projects (preservation plans, site management plans, cultural landscape reports, etc.)

4) Interpretation Projects (also includes education)

5) Advocacy (any project meant to engage the public in a way that would benefit the preservation
of the site, e.g. PR, lobbying, public outreach, petitioning for action, etc.)

6) Legislation (any local, state, or federal legislation designed to encourage preservation of the
battlefield individually or together with other similar sites)

7) Fundraising
a. To support program activities?
b. To support land acquisition/easements?

8) Other

Update to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Report on the Nation’s Civil War Battlefields
DRAFT – State of Alabama

50


